
531-4
HHS Instruction 531-4, Within-Grade and Quality Step Increases

Material Superseded:

HHS Instruction 531-4 (all)
HHS Instruction 531-5 (all)

Background:
This Instruction has been revised consistent with recent changes in the organization of HHS, and in support of HHS administrative initiatives calling for more streamlined rules and greater delegations of authority.

Under this issuance, two Instructions have been consolidated because of similar subject matter and greater streamlining of the rules.

Any reference to "OPDIV" in this Instruction now includes AHCPR, ATSDR, CDC, FDA, HRSA, IHS, NIH, SAMHSA, the Office of the Secretary, the program Support Center, HCFA, ACF, and AOA.

This issuance is effective immediately.  Implementation of this issuance must be carried out in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, and bargaining agreements.

Filing Instructions:
Remove superseded material and file new material.  Post receipt of this transmittal to the HHS Check List of Transmittals and file this transmittal in sequential order after the check list.





							John J. Callahan
							Assistant Secretary for
							Management and Budget


INSTRUCTION 531-4

Distribution:  MS (PERS):  HRFC-001
 
HHS INSTRUCTION 531-4
WITHIN-GRADE AND QUALITY STEP INCREASES

531-4-00	Purpose
	10	References
	20	Use or Nonuse of Forms

	Exhibit 351-4-A   Delegations of Authority

531-4-00  PURPOSE

This Instruction states the Department’s procedures for granting and witholding within-grade increases (WIGIs) and granting quality step increases (QSIs) in recognition of outstanding performance.

531-4-10  REFERENCES

A.	5 U.S. Code 5335 (law - periodic step increases)
B.	5 U.S. Code 5336 (law - additional step increases)
C.	5 CFR Part 531, Subpart D (regulations - within-grade increases)
D.	5 CFR Part 531, Subpart E (regulations - quality step increases)
E.	HHS Instruction 430-4 (Employee Performance Management System:  Performance Appraisal)
F.	HHS Instruction 430-7 (Performance Appraisal System)


531-4-2O  USE OR NONUSE OF FORMS

The Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) forms used to record WIGIS (Level of Competence Certification) and QSIS (DHHS Recommendation for Quality Increases) may continue to be used, OPDIVs may elect to use comparable forms, or OPDIVs may determine that there is no need for forms. Even if forms are not used, OPDIVs must have procedures in place to ensure that all requirements for WIGIS and QSIS are met. If OPDIVs want the system to generate the WIGI forms, they must continue to use the DHHS form.

 

DELEGATIONS OF AUTHORITY

A.	Authority Delegated

1.	I hereby delegate to all immediate supervisors, through the officials in the line of supervision above them, (a) the authority to make favorable and negative level of competence determinations for periodic within-grade increases for the employees under their supervision and (b) the authority to reverse or sustain a negative determination upon request of an employee for reconsideration of a negative determination.

2.	A Head of an OPDIV, including the Assistant Secretary for Management and Budget for employees of the Office of the Secretary, if he or she elects, may delegate to some official other than the immediate supervisor the authority in paragraph l(b) above.

3.	I hereby delegate to all immediate and second level supervisors, through the officials in the line of supervision above them, the authorities, respectively, to recommend quality step increases and to concur and nonconcur in quality step increases for the employees under their supervision.

4.	Information and guidance for exercising the above authorities is found in 5 CFR Part 531, Subparts D and E.

B.	Prior Delegations

This delegation supersedes all prior delegations.  To the extent that previous delegations of authority to make favorable and negative level of competence determinations for periodic within-grade increases and to reverse or sustain a negative determination, or recommend quality step increases and to concur and nonconcur in quality step increases are consistent with the provisions of this delegation, they may remain in effect until new redelegations are made under the authority of this delegation.
	
C.	Effective Date

This delegation is effective on the date of this transmittal.
