42-1
HHS Personnel Instruction 42-1: Appointment of 42 U.S.C. § 209(f) Special Consultants
Issuance Date:  March 11, 2015

Material Transmitted:
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 42-1, Appointment of 42

U.S.C. § 209(f) Special Consultants, dated March 11, 2015.

Material Superseded:
HHS Instruction 42-1, Appointment of 42 U.S.C. § 209(f) Special Consultants, dated February 15, 2012.

Background:
This instruction provides guidance to Operating Divisions and Staff Divisions on the minimum eligibility and qualification requirements for appointments made under 42 U.S.C. § 209(f).  Additionally, the Instruction provides guidance on compensation, awards, performance management and benefits for those serving on appointments made under 42 U.S.C. § 209(f).

This issuance is effective immediately.  Implementation under this issuance must be carried out in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, collective bargaining agreements, and Department policy.

/s/
E. J. Holland, Jr.
Assistant Secretary for Administration

42-00 Background
The authority to hire "special consultants" is granted by 42 U.S.C. §209(f) Special Consultants, which provides:

In accordance with regulations, special consultants may be employed to assist and advise in the operations of the Service. Such consultants may be appointed without regard to the civil-service laws.
The implementing regulation, 42 C.F.R. § 22.3(a) Appointments of special consultants, provides:

When the Public Health Service requires the services of consultants who cannot be obtained when needed through regular Civil Service appointment or under the compensation provisions of the Classification Act of 1949, special consultants to assist and advise in the operations of the Service may be appointed, subject to the provisions of the following paragraphs and in accordance with such instructions as may be issued from time to time by the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
42-10 Purpose
The policy establishes the minimum qualification and eligibility standards for compliance with the regulation implementing 42 U.S.C. § 209(f). An operating division (OPDIV) may apply more stringent requirements where that OPDIV deems necessary for its purpose. These baseline standards, however, must be adhered to in all instances.

42-20 Authorities
42 U.S.C. § 209(f) Special consultants
42 C.F.R. § 22.3(a) Appointment of special consultants
Pub. L. No. 102-94
42-30 Definitions
Peer Review means the scientific and technical evaluation by a panel of experts who are qualified by training and experience in particular scientific or technical fields, or as authorities knowledgeable in the various disciplines and fields related to the scientific areas under review, to give expert advice concerning the scientific and technical merit and relevance of the subject matter investigated.

Scientific Position means (1) a professional occupation directly involved in the conduct of high-level research studies, regulatory or product reviews, investigations, or experimentations in a branch of natural science, applied science, biomedical science, or related scientific field; or (2) management or supervision of such research studies, regulatory or product reviews, investigations, or experimentations, in which scientific expertise and credentials are required to provide appropriate program direction.

42-40 Coverage
Appointments under 42 U.S.C. § 209(f) may only be used to fill scientific positions. The authority will be used only when recruitment or retention efforts under other available and applicable personnel systems, including Title 5 of the United States Code, the Senior Biomedical Research Service (SBRS), and the PHS Commissioned Corps, have failed to yield candidates that possess critical scientific expertise. This instruction does not apply to any other excepted service appointments, including Special Government Employees (SGEs), Expert and Consultants, the SBRS, or those covered by 42 U.S.C. § 209(g).
While employees appointed under 42 U.S.C. § 209(f) are not covered by the laws or regulations outlined in 5 U.S.C or 5 C.F.R, there are instances in which Title 5 principles are used to effectuate actions for employees appointed under 42 U.S.C.§ 209(f).
42-50 Tenure
All appointments, including conversions from other pay systems, to positions under 42 U.S.C. § 209(f) are in the excepted service. Work schedules may be full-time, part-time, or intermittent.
Appointments may be indefinite. That is, they do not have a stated time limit so one may serve an entire Federal career under an indefinite appointment.
42-60 Qualifications
Education
Candidates must meet education requirements in a scientific discipline directly related to the position being filled, in accordance with the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) qualification standards.
At a minimum, the candidate must possess a doctoral-level degree from an accredited institution of higher learning, including: Ph.D., M.D., D.V.M., D.D.S., D.M.D., Sc.D., or other research doctoral-degree widely recognized in U.S. academe as equivalent to a Ph.D. Exceptions to this requirement must be approved by the OP DIV  head or designee and the justification must be documented.
Candidates that have completed part or all of their education outside of the United States must have their foreign education, necessary to meet qualification requirements, evaluated by an accredited organization to ensure that the foreign education is comparable to education received in the United States. It is the responsibility of the candidate to provide written proof of his/her foreign education accreditation prior to appointment. In addition, the servicing human resources office is responsible for verification.
Candidates must furnish proof, prior to appointment (e.g., official transcript; ECFMG certification; foreign education accreditation), that they meet all required education requirements.
Experience
Candidates must have professional experience and stature in their area of expertise commensurate with the duties of the position being filled. At minimum, a candidate's experience must be equivalent to the minimum qualification standards prescribed for a position at the GS 13 level or higher.
In order to determine eligibility, supervisors must prepare a narrative statement fully describing the scientific duties and responsibilities of the position, the requisite educational background, and experience required to perform those duties. A classified position description is not required. However, the statement of duties must be reviewed to determine equivalent grade level.
Eligible Series
All Title 42 positions must be identifiable within a General Schedule occupational group. The title and series assigned to the position will be based on the duties of the position.
42-70 Compensation
Salaries for individuals appointed on a full-time schedule will be set on a per annum basis commensurate with the applicants' qualifications, experience, and other factors as described below. Appointments that are on other than a full-time basis will be paid on a pro-rata basis of an annualized salary.
For purposes of this program, the appointee's compensation is the base salary for pay, leave, and benefits, as well as retention allowances, recruitment/relocation bonuses, and awards, which are not included in base salary. Base salary will be set at the lowest rate necessary to recruit the candidate. In determining the base salary,  management must consider such factors as:
Current salary;
Competing offer of employment, either written or verbal;
Stature of individual in his/her professional field;
Average salary from a published salary survey;
Urgency of the program relative to mission accomplishment;
Role and impact of the individual in the program;
Recruitment efforts, e.g., turnover rates, labor market factors, recruitment/retention statistics;
Specialized skills/training, and experience that the applicant may possess that will benefit the agency/program;
Compensation for cost of living disparity as reflected in a salary comparison;
Complexity of duties;
Consistency of pay with others in the organization; and
Responsibilities within the organization
Base salary may be set up to $275,000 per annum at the discretion of the OPDIV except for those employed on time limited appointments. Recommendations for base salary above $275,000 must be submitted by the OPDIV head to the Assistant Secretary for Administration (ASA), for approval by the Secretary.
Base salary for employees on time limited appointments may not exceed the rate set in accordance with Pub. L. No. 102-394.
Pay Increases
Automatic cost of living adjustments do not apply to 42 U.S.C. § 209(f) appointments. All pay increases will be performance based, will be consistent with the employee's annual performance appraisal and will be limited to one increase per year. Any pay increase outside of the normal performance cycle requires an exception authorized by the OPDIV head. Such exceptions must be fully documented and justified.
Performance based pay increases will normally be limited to a maximum of six percent. OPDIV heads may authorize higher increases where performance clearly warrants. All pay increases must be fully documented and justified.
Recommended pay increases that will increase base salary above $275,000 per annum, must be submitted by the OPDIV head to ASA for approval by the Secretary. Such requests must be fully documented and justified.
Pay Caps
Base salary cannot exceed $275,000 in a calendar year unless a higher rate is approved by the Secretary.
Total compensation (including recruitment bonuses, retention allowances, and cash awards) cannot exceed $300,000 in a calendar year without the prior approval of the Secretary.
Base salary for employees on time limited appointments may not exceed the rate set in accordance with Pub. L. No. 102-394.
Pay Incentives
Employees appointed under 42 U.S.C. § 209(f) are eligible to receive recruitment, retention, and relocation bonuses. While not covered by the compensation laws and regulations outlined in 5 U.S.C. and 5 C.F.R., the same criteria and coding used for Title 5 employees will be used for employees appointed under Title 42 when making decisions regarding eligibility and implementation of these incentives.
Employees appointed under section 209 (f) cannot receive special salary rates, Physician's Comparability Allowances (PCAs), or Physician Special Pay (Title 38). No exceptions are authorized.
42-80 Initial Appointments
Appointments under 42 U.S.C. § 209(f) may only be used to fill scientific positions when recruitment or retention efforts under other available personnel systems, including Title 5 of the U.S. Code, the SBRS, and PHS Commissioned Corps, have failed to yield candidates that possess critical scientific expertise. The recruitment efforts used under other available personnel systems (i.e., Title 5) must be as extensive and exhaustive as those used to recruit under Title 42. These efforts, as well as the scientific credentials of the potential appointee, must be fully documented. Before 42 U.S.C. § 209(f) may be used, the OPDIV must demonstrate that the following criteria have been met:

Efforts to recruit and/or retain under other available personnel systems were attempted, but unsuccessful, and these recruitment efforts must be completed prior to commencing recruitment under Title 42;
The recruitment efforts utilized for other available personnel systems were as extensive as those used to recruit under Title 42 (e.g., nationwide search, ads in professional journals, vacancy information shared with professional organizations, etc.); and
The applicant's credentials, experience, and stature in the scientific community are commensurate with, and directly related to the position being filled.
42-90 Conversions from Other Pay Systems
Conversions are only to be used in exceptional circumstances as outlined in this policy. A scientist may only be converted to a 42 U.S.C. § 209(f) appointment from another pay system if he/she is appropriately peer-reviewed according to the requirements outlined in this instruction and OPDIV procedures and is determined to meet all the following criteria:

Evidence of recognition as a national or international expert in the field, such as: specific experience, invited manuscripts, presentations, and consultations; receipt of honors and/or awards; or other recognition for noteworthy performance or contributions to the field;
Evidence of original scientific or scholarly contributions of major significance in the field;
Evidence of leadership in the field; and
Special knowledge and skills of benefit to the agency.
42-100 Positions Designated as 42 U.S.C. § 209(f)
There are some positions within HHS that require a level of scientific expertise that has historically not been successfully recruited or retained under regular civil service appointment. To expedite the recruitment process and limit the amount of time these positions remain vacant, a subset of high level, mission critical positions within each OPDIV may be designated as 42 U.S.C. § 209(f). This designation will allow such positions to be filled through 42 U.S.C.  § 209(f) without the requirement to document efforts to fill the position through other available personnel systems each time the position is vacated and/or filled. In order to obtain this designation, OPDIV s must submit a request, in accordance with section 42-110 of this instruction, and obtain approval from the Assistant Secretary for Administration (ASA).
The list of specific individual and categorical positions, identified in Appendix 3, are covered by this designation.
42-110 Case Documentation and Approval Procedures
A template to document the required justification for initial 42 U.S.C. §209(f) appointments is provided as Appendix 1. The OPDIV must use this template, or develop an equivalent that documents how the criteria outlined in 42-80 of this policy have been met.

Conversions: Conversions are only to be used in exceptional circumstances as outlined in this policy. In addition, the OPDIV must document the results of the peer review, demonstrating that the employee meets the required criteria outlined in 42-90 of this policy.
Positions Designated as 42 U.S.C. § 209(f): For positions not identified in Appendix 3, OPDIVs may request this designation for specific positions. This designation must be approved for each specific position, or group of positions, by the ASA. In order to be considered for 42 U.S.C. §209(f) designation, the OPDIV must submit the following documentation to the HHS OHR Title 42 Program Manager:
Historical data, including, but not limited to, current (not to exceed 5 years), local and national labor market analysis and workforce analysis, demonstrating that prior efforts to recruit and/or retain under other available personnel systems were attempted, but unsuccessful; and
Description of the position, including the credentials and experience necessary fo r an incumbent to possess to be successful in the position.
42-120 Benefits
While the laws and regulations outlined in 5 U.S.C. and 5 C.F.R. do not apply to employees appointed under 42 U.S.C. § 209(f), the benefits available (e.g., life insurance, health insurance, retirement, etc.), as well as the criteria for eligibility are the same for both groups of employees. Specifically, employees appointed under 42 U.S.C. § 209(f) for more than 12 months (with the exception of non-citizens in overseas locations) will receive benefits equivalent to those of employees appointed under Title 5.
As noted above, although the laws and regulations outlined in 5 U.S.C and 5 C.F.R do not apply to employees appointed under 42 U.S.C. § 209(f), these employees are covered by the same leave provisions as employees appointed under Title 5.
42-130 Awards
Employees appointed under 42 U.S.C. § 209(f) are eligible for the following categories of awards: performance-based cash awards, onetime special act awards (including on the spot and time off awards), and honorary awards.

42-140 Performance Management and Conduct
All Title 42 employees must be on a performance plan that meets all requirements of the appropriate Departmental performance system. Ratings under the performance plan will be used as the basis for pay decisions.
Title 42 employees must maintain acceptable performance and conduct m order to be retained in their positions.
42-150 Other Actions
If an employee voluntarily or involuntarily separates from a Title 42 position and seeks to return to a non-Title 42 position, the employee may be considered in accordance with all civil service or Commissioned Corps requirements. Pay of Title 42 employees, upon converting to a non-Title 42 position, will be set no higher than the maximum General Schedule pay limitations under Title 5 for civil servants and regular pay tables (including any applicable special or professional pay) for Commissioned Corps officers.
Prior to appointment or conversion to a Title 42 position, employees must be informed in writing that they are not entitled to Merit System Protection Board (MSPB) appeal rights under the Civil Service Reform Act (CSRA).
42-160 Conduct Laws and Regulations
Title 42 employees must comply with all ethical and conduct-related laws and regulations applicable to other Executive Branch employees. These include laws concerning financial interests, financial disclosure, and conduct regulations promulgated by the Department, by the Office of Government Ethics, and other agencies.

42-170 Processing Appointments and Conversions to 42 U.S.C. § 209(t)
Initial and Subsequent Appointments. Requests to appoint and/or convert individuals using 42 U.S.C. § 209(f) will be processed in accordance with the OPM Guide to Processing Personnel Actions.
Employees appointed or converted to a 42 U.S.C. § 209(f) pos1t1on must sign a statement documenting their understanding that they are accepting an excepted service appointment and to acknowledge that they are not entitled to MSPB appeal rights under the CSRA.
Appointment of Non-citizens: Non-citizens may be appointed as permitted by law. The non-citizen must have an appropriate work visa.
42-180 Program Review and Evaluation
The ASA, Office of Human Resources, will periodically review appointments made under the 42 U.S.C. § 209(f) authority and associated supporting documentation to ensure proper use.

Appendix 1: Required Documentation for Initial Appointments Under 42 U.S.C. § 209(f)
The following information must be documented and maintained for each individual initial appointment made under 42 U.S.C. § 209(f). The information must be maintained by the OPDIV and made available upon request from the HHS OHR.

Position Summary: Provide a summary of the position, including major duties/ responsibilities and required qualifications/experience.

Recruitment Efforts:

Provide a summary of recruitment efforts to fill this position through other available personnel systems. Provide detailed information regarding recruitment strategies (e.g., USAJOBS, professional journals, professional organizations, etc.); number of applicants; and probable reasons recruitment efforts were unsuccessful.
Provide a summary of recruitment efforts used to fill the position through Title 42, if different from those used for other personnel systems, please explain.
Candidate Qualifications and Experience: Provide a summary of the candidate's credentials, experience, and stature in the scientific community and explain how they are commensurate with, and directly related to the position being filled.

Appendix 2: Documentation Checklist for 42 U.S.C. § 209(f) Appointments
For All Appointments be sure to include:

Statement of Duties
CV
Documentation to support positive education requirements (e.g., official transcript)
Statement signed by employee acknowledging he/she understands that he/she is accepting an excepted service appointment and is not entitled to MSPB appeal rights under the CSRA
Appropriate employment visa (if applicable)
Salary justification
Any other documentation deemed necessary by the OPDIV
For Initial Appointments be sure to include:

Summary of Recruitment Efforts and Supporting Documentation for Title 5 or Other Available Personnel System
Summary of Recruitment Efforts and Supporting Documentation for 42 U.S.C. § 209(f)
Qualification and Experience Summary
For Conversion Actions be sure to include:

Peer Review Summary
Appendix 3: 42 U.S.C. § 209(f) Official Scientific Individual/ Categorical Designations
42 U.S.C. § 209(f) appointments may appropriately be made at the NIH, CDC, and FDA if in the designated official scientific individual/categorical position titles listed below.

NIH

Senior Investigator (excluding Clinical Senior Investigators) NIH Distinguished Investigator
NIH Clinical Track (HS)
Investigator
Staff Clinician
Senior Clinician Scientific Executive NIH Deputy Director
IC Director
IC Deputy Director Scientific Director
Investigator 2 (tenure-track scientists) Science Policy/Program Leaders, Tier 2
CDC

Centers/Institutes/Offices (CIO) Directors and Associate Directors CIO Deputies
Division Director level scientific positions
Associate Director for Science, Office of the Associate Director for Science
Principal Deputy Director, Center for Global Health, Division of Global Health HIV/AIDS
FDA

Deputy Commissioner
Chief Scientist
Associate Commissioner
Associate Director and Deputy Director
Center Director and Deputy Center Director
Office Director and Deputy Office Director
Senior Science Advisor


















42-2
1
Material Transmitted: September 19, 2012
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 42-2, Appointment of 42
U.S.C. § 209(g) Service Fellows.
Background:
This instruction provides guidance to Operating Divisions and Staff Divisions on the
minimum requirements for appointments made under 42 U.S.C. § 209(g). Additionally, the
Instruction provides guidance on compensation, awards, performance management, benefits
and leave for those serving on appointments made under 42 U.S.C. § 209(g).
This issuance is effective immediately. Implementation under this issuance must be carried
out in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, bargaining agreements, and Department
policy.
 /Denise L. Carter/
 Denise L. Carter
 Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources
INSTRUCTION 42-2
HUMAN RESOURCES MANUAL
Instruction 42-2: APPOINTMENT OF 42 U.S.C. § 209(g) SERVICE FELLOWS
Issuance Date: September 12, 2012
2
HHS PERSONNEL INSTRUCTION 42-2
APPOINTMENT OF 42 U.S.C. § 209(g) SERVICE FELLOWS
42-00 Background
42-10 Purpose
42-20 Authorities
42-30 Coverage
42-40 Tenure
42-50 Qualifications
42-60 Service Fellowship Categories
42-70 Selection and Appointment
42-80 Compensation
42-90 Performance Management and Conduct
42-100 Benefits and Leave
42-110 Awards
42-120 Other Actions
42-130 Conduct Laws and Regulations
42-140 Processing Appointments and Conversions to 42 U.S.C. § 209(g)
42-150 Program Review and Evaluation
42-00 Background
The authority to hire fellows is granted by section 209(g) of the Public Health Service (PHS) Act,
codified at 42 U.S.C. §209(g), which provides:
In accordance with regulations, individual scientists, other than commissioned
officers of the Service, may be designated by the Surgeon General to receive
fellowships, appointed for duty with the Service without regard to the civilservice laws, may hold their fellowships under conditions prescribed therein, and
may be assigned for studies or investigations either in this country or abroad
during the terms of their fellowships.
42-10 Purpose
Service fellowships in the Public Health Service are for the purpose of encouraging and promoting
research, studies, and investigations related to health. Such fellowships may be provided to secure
the services of talented scientists for a period of limited duration for health related research, studies,
and investigations where the nature of the work or the character of the individual's services render
customary employing methods impracticable or less effective.
42-20 Authorities
42 U.S.C. § 209(g) Designation for fellowships; duties; pay
42 U.S.C. § 209(h) Aliens
42 C.F.R. § 61, Subpart B, Service Fellowships
Pub. L. No. 102-394, § 202
HUMAN RESOURCES MANUAL
Instruction 42-2: APPOINTMENT OF 42 U.S.C. § 209(g) SERVICE FELLOWS
Issuance Date: September 12, 2012
42-30 Coverage
3
A. This policy applies to the establishment of service fellowships in the Public Health Service,
the designation of persons to receive such fellowships, and the appointment of service fellows
under authority of 42 U.S.C. § 209(g). This instruction does not apply to any other excepted
service appointments, including but not limited to, Special Government Employees, Experts
and Consultants, the Senior Biomedical Research Service, or those covered by 42 U.S.C. §
209(f).
B. While the laws or regulations found in 5 U.S.C. or 5 C.F.R. do not apply generally to
employees appointed under 42 U.S.C. § 209(g), there are instances in which Title 5 principles
are used to effectuate actions for employees appointed under 42 U.S.C. § 209(g).
42-40 Tenure
A. All appointments, including conversions from other pay systems, to positions under 42
U.S.C. § 209(g) are in the excepted service. Work schedules may be full-time or part-time.
B. All appointments must be time-limited – indefinite appointments are not permitted. Initial
appointments may be made for varying periods not in excess of 5 years. Such appointments
may be extended or renewed for varying periods not to exceed 5 years for each period.
Extensions or renewals of appointments are not automatic.
C. Appointments may be terminated before their expiration date for cause (e.g., personal or
scientific misconduct), unsatisfactory performance, or administrative reasons including, but
not limited to, programmatic changes and/or budgetary considerations.
42-50 Qualifications
A. Candidates must meet education requirements in a scientific discipline directly related to the
position being filled, in accordance with the Office of Personnel Management (OPM)
qualification standards.
B. At a minimum, the candidate must possess a doctoral-level degree from an accredited
institution of higher learning, including: Ph.D., M.D., D.V.M., D.D.S., D.M.D., Sc.D., or
other research doctoral-degree widely recognized in U.S. academe as equivalent to a Ph.D.
C. A lower level of education may be acceptable depending on the needs of the particular
fellowship. Such exceptions to this requirement must be approved by the OPDIV head or
designee and the justification must be documented.
D. Candidates who have completed part or all of their education outside of the United States
must, in order to meet qualification requirements, have their foreign education evaluated by
an accredited organization to ensure that the foreign education is comparable to education
received in the United States. It is the responsibility of the candidate to provide written proof
of his/her foreign education accreditation prior to appointment. In addition, the servicing
human resources office is responsible for verification.
HUMAN RESOURCES MANUAL
Instruction 42-2: APPOINTMENT OF 42 U.S.C. § 209(g) SERVICE FELLOWS
Issuance Date: September 12, 2012
4
E. Candidates must furnish proof, prior to appointment (e.g., official transcript; Education
Commission for Medical Graduates Certification; foreign education accreditation), that they
meet all required education requirements.
42-60 Service Fellowship Categories
OPDIVs are responsible for the establishment of service fellowships, or a series of service
fellowships and shall prescribe, in writing, the conditions under which service fellows will be
appointed and hold their fellowships.
42-70 Selection and Appointment
A. Sufficient outreach efforts must be taken to assure that a diverse pool of potential candidates
(e.g. minorities, women, and individuals with disabilities) are made aware of fellowship
opportunities.
B. Official position descriptions are not required. However, the supervisor must prepare a
narrative statement fully describing the duties and responsibilities required. The narrative
statement should be reviewed periodically and updated as necessary to ensure that the duties
are commensurate with the level of compensation. The review should also ensure the
narrative statement accurately reflects the work being performed.
42-80 Compensation
A. Salaries for individuals appointed on a full-time schedule will be set on a per annum basis
commensurate with the applicants' qualifications, experience, and other factors as described
below. Appointments that are on other than a full-time basis will be paid on a pro-rata basis
of an annualized salary.
B. For purposes of this program, the appointee's compensation is the base salary for pay, leave,
and benefits, as well as retention allowances, recruitment/relocation bonuses, and awards,
which are not included in base salary. In determining the base salary, management must
consider such factors as:
Qualifications and stature of individual in his/her professional field;
Salary the Fellow may be expected to receive outside the Federal government for work
similar to his/her fellowship assignment;
Specialized skills/training, and experience that the applicant may possess that will benefit
the agency/program; and
Consistency of pay with others in the organization.
C. Base salary may not exceed the rate set in accordance with Pub. L. No. 102-394.
D. Annual Comparability Increases and Pay Increases
1. Employees appointed under 42 U.S.C. §209(g) may receive annual increases. This may
or may not be the same increase as is applicable to the General Schedule. An annual
increase may not raise an employee’s base salary above the rate set in accordance with
Pub. L. No. 102-394. The OPDIV Head or his/her designee will make this determination
and approve such pay adjustments.
HUMAN RESOURCES MANUAL
Instruction 42-2: APPOINTMENT OF 42 U.S.C. § 209(g) SERVICE FELLOWS
Issuance Date: September 12, 2012
5
2. Employees appointed under 42 U.S.C. §209(g) also may receive other pay adjustments.
The OPDIV Head or his/her designee must establish the rates and eligibility
requirements. Other pay adjustments may not raise an employee’s base salary above the
rate set in accordance with Pub. L. No. 102-394. All pay adjustments must be fully
documented and justified in accordance with OPDIV policy.
E. Pay Incentives
1. Employees appointed under 42 U.S.C. § 209(g) are eligible to receive recruitment,
retention, and relocation bonuses. While these employees are not covered by the
compensation laws and regulations outlined in 5 U.S.C. and 5 C.F.R., the same criteria
and coding used for Title 5 employees will be used for employees appointed under
Section 209(g) when making decisions regarding eligibility and implementation of these
incentives.
2. Employees appointed under Section 209(g) cannot receive special salary rates,
Physician's Comparability Allowances, or Physician Special Pay under Title 38. No
exceptions are authorized.
F. Travel and Transportation
The following travel allowances may be authorized for employees appointed under 42 U.S.C.
§ 209(g) and are payable under authority of 42 CFR § 61.37, at the same rates authorized for
Title 5 employees. Claims for reimbursement are made in accordance with procedures
prescribed in the DHHS Travel Manual.
1. Travel allowances or transportation and per diem from place of residence, within or
outside the continental United States, to first duty station;
2. Travel allowances or transportation and per diem for any change of duty station during
the term of the fellowship;
3. Travel allowances or transportation and per diem while traveling on official duty away
from the permanent duty station; and
4. Travel allowances or transportation and per diem from last duty station to place of
residence which he/she left to accept the fellowship, or to some other place at no greater
cost to the Government.
42-90 Benefits Including Leave
A. While the laws and regulations found in 5 U.S.C. and 5 C.F.R. do not apply generally to
employees appointed under 42 U.S.C. § 209(g), the benefits available (e.g., life insurance,
health insurance, retirement, etc.), as well as the criteria for eligibility are the same for both
groups of employees. Specifically, employees appointed under 42 U.S.C. § 209(g) for more
than 12 months (with the exception of non-citizens in overseas locations) will be eligible for
benefits equivalent to those of employees appointed under Title 5.
B. As noted above, although the laws and regulations outlined in 5 U.S.C. and 5 C.F.R. do not
apply generally to employees appointed under 42 U.S.C. § 209(g), these employees are
covered by the same leave provisions as employees appointed under Title 5.
HUMAN RESOURCES MANUAL
Instruction 42-2: APPOINTMENT OF 42 U.S.C. § 209(g) SERVICE FELLOWS
Issuance Date: September 12, 2012
6
42-100 Training and Awards
A. Employees appointed under 42 U.S.C. § 209(g) are eligible for training at Government
expense on the same basis as employees appointed under Title 5.
B. Employees appointed under 42 U.S.C. § 209(g) are eligible for performance-based cash
awards, onetime special act awards (including on the spot and time off awards), honorary
awards, and other awards as appropriate.
42-110 Performance Management and Conduct
A. All Title 42 U.S.C. § 209(g) employees must be on a performance plan that meets all
requirements of the appropriate Departmental performance system. Depending on the
performance system, ratings under the performance plan may be used as the basis for pay
decisions.
B. Title 42 U.S.C. § 209(g) employees must maintain acceptable performance and conduct in
order to be retained in their positions.
42-120 Other Actions
A. If an employee voluntarily or involuntarily separates from a Title 42 U.S.C. § 209(g) position
and seeks to return to a non-Title 42 position, the employee may be considered in accordance
with all civil service or Commissioned Corps requirements. Pay of Title 42 U.S.C. § 209(g)
employees, upon converting to a non-Title 42 position, will be set no higher than the
maximum General Schedule pay limitations under Title 5 for civil servants and regular pay
tables (including any applicable special or professional pay) for Commissioned Corps
officers.
B. Prior to appointment or conversion to a Title 42 U.S.C. § 209(g) position, employees must be
informed in writing that they are not entitled to Merit System Protection Board (MSPB)
appeal rights under the Civil Service Reform Act (CSRA).
42-130 Conduct Laws and Regulations
Title 42 U.S.C. § 209(g) employees must comply with all ethical and conduct-related laws and
regulations applicable to other Executive Branch employees. These include laws concerning financial
interests, financial disclosure, and conduct regulations promulgated by the Department, by the Office
of Government Ethics, and other agencies.
42-140 Processing Appointments and Conversions to 42 U.S.C. § 209(g)
A. Initial and Subsequent Appointments. Requests to appoint and/or convert individuals using
42 U.S.C. § 209(g) will be processed in accordance with the OPM Guide to Processing
Personnel Actions.
B. Employees appointed or converted to a 42 U.S.C. § 209(g) position must sign a statement
documenting their understanding that they are accepting an excepted service appointment and
HUMAN RESOURCES MANUAL
Instruction 42-2: APPOINTMENT OF 42 U.S.C. § 209(g) SERVICE FELLOWS
Issuance Date: September 12, 2012
7
to acknowledge that they are not entitled to MSPB appeal rights under the CSRA.
C. Non-citizens may be appointed as permitted by 42 U.S.C. § 209(h). The non-citizen must
have an appropriate work visa. Appointments and/or extensions of non-citizens may not
exceed the duration of their visas.
42-150 Program Review and Evaluation
The Division of Administration, Office of Human Resources periodically will review appointments
made under the 42 U.S.C. § 209(g) authority to ensure proper use. 












42-3
HHS Instruction 42-3: Senior Biomedical Research and Biomedical Product Assessment Service
Issue Date: November 10, 2022

Material Transmitted:
HHS Instruction 42-3, Senior Biomedical Research and Biomedical Product Assessment Service (SBRBPAS), dated November 10, 2022

Material Superseded:
HHS Instruction 42-3, Senior Biomedical Research and Biomedical Product Assessment Service (SBRBPAS), dated July 9, 2021

OHR Executive and Scientific Resources Division Standard Operating Procedure 300-22, SBRS, dated November 12, 2010

Background:
This issuance of this policy updates titling instructions for official SBRBPAS Expert positions. See 42-3-70(I)2-3.

This Instruction establishes Department policy on employment in the Silvio O. Conte Senior Biomedical Research and Biomedical Product Assessment Service (SBRBPAS). It establishes an HHS-wide policy on managing the Service’s allocations, policy board, and reporting requirements. This Instruction incorporates amendments to the SBRBPAS made by the 21st Century Cures Act (Public Law 114-255, Section 3071).

This issuance is effective immediately and must be carried out by HHS Operating and Staff Division HR Centers in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, bargaining agreements, and Departmental policy.

for/W. Robert Leavitt
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources and Chief Human Capital Officer

SUBJECT:     SENIOR BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH AND BIOMEDICAL PRODUCT ASSESSMENT SERVICE
42-3-00           Purpose
42-3-10           References
42-3-20           Coverage and Exclusions
42-3-30           Definitions
42-3-40           Responsibilities
42-3-50           Policy Board
42-3-60           Allocation Management
42-3-70           Appointment Procedures
42-3-80           Compensation
42-3-90           Performance
42-3-100         Removals
42-3-110         Documentation, Reporting, and Accountability

42-3-00           PURPOSE
This Instruction sets forth provisions relating to the employment of scientific and technical experts in the fields of biomedical research, clinical research evaluation, and biomedical product assessment within HHS’ Senior Biomedical Research and Biomedical Product Assessment Service (Service or SBRBPAS) as part of the Department’s Public Health Service. This Instruction also establishes an HHS-wide policy on managing the Service’s allocations, policy board, and reporting requirements.

When provisions of this policy differ from changes in applicable law or regulation, the changes in law or regulation apply.

42-3-10           REFERENCES
Public Law 114-255, 21st Century Cures Act, Section 3071, Silvio O. Conte Senior Biomedical Research and Biomedical Product Assessment Service - PDF
42 United States Code (U.S.C.), Chapter 6A, Public Health Service 
42 U.S.C. Section 237, Silvio O. Conte Senior Biomedical Research and Biomedical Product Assessment Service 
42 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 24, Senior Biomedical Research and Biomedical Product Assessment Service
Delegation of Human Resources Authorities memo from the HHS Assistant Secretary of Administration, dated October 15, 2019
42-3-20           COVERAGE AND EXCLUSIONS
Coverage. This Instruction covers scientific and technical experts in the fields of biomedical research, clinical research evaluation, and biomedical product assessment within the SBRBPAS. HHS Operating and Staff Divisions (OpDivs/StaffDivs) who are components of the Public Health Service and have been authorized allocations may utilize the SBRBPAS authority.
Exclusions. This Instruction only covers SBRBPAS positions under 42 U.S.C §237. All other Title 42 appointment authorities are excluded.
Bargaining Unit Employees. The provisions of this Instruction about conditions of employment of bargaining unit employees (e.g., the filling of a position within the scope of the bargaining unit, promotion and reassignments, adverse actions, and reorganizations) are fully negotiable in accordance with 5 U.S.C. Chapter 71 , and such actions require notification to labor organizations when impacted employees are bargaining unit employees. When the provisions of this Instruction differ from the requirements of applicable collective bargaining agreement(s), the collective bargaining agreement takes precedence for bargaining unit employees.
42-3-30           DEFINITIONS
Biomedical product assessment. The area of science is dedicated to developing or evaluating delivery systems of products, processes, and/or technologies designed to prevent and treat disease and/or promote health.
Biomedical research. The area of science is devoted to studying the biological processes of life, disease prevention and treatment, health promotion, and social, genetic, and environmental factors related to health and diseases.
Clinical research evaluation. The area of science is dedicated to evaluating behavioral and biomedical interventions to prevent and treat disease and promote health.
Excepted Service. Positions that are not in the competitive service or the Senior Executive Service (SES); include all positions in the Executive Branch of the Federal Government which are specifically excepted from the requirements of the competitive service by statute, Executive Order, or by the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) regulation.
Expert. An individual qualified via education and experience to perform biomedical research, clinical research evaluation, and/or biomedical product assessment, as defined in this Instruction, beyond the typical range of achievement of competent scientific and/or technical persons in those fields. Their professional community recognized them as an authority or practitioner of outstanding competence and skill in biomedical research, clinical research evaluation, and/or biomedical product assessment.
Public Health Service (PHS). A division of HHS focused on protecting, promoting, and advancing public health and safety. The Assistant Secretary of Health (OASH) oversees the PHS, including the Commissioned Corps (not covered by this Instruction/authority). Ten (10) HHS Operating Divisions/Staff Divisions (OpDivs/StaffDivs) are PHS components:
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response (ASPR);
Office of Global Affairs (OGA);
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ);
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR);
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC);
Food and Drug Administration (FDA);
Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA);
Indian Health Service (IHS);
National Institutes of Health (NIH); and
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA).
42-3-40           RESPONSIBILITIES
HHS Secretary or designee:
Ensures SBRBPAS allocations are used in direct support of HHS goals and priorities in the areas of biomedical research, clinical research evaluation, and biomedical product assessment;
Approves the number of allocations assigned to each OpDiv/StaffDiv based on the current mission and the need for such scientific and technical expertise;
Approves pay requests exceeding $275,000 per annum; and
May establish an SBRBPAS Policy Board.
HHS Assistant Secretary for Administration, Office of Human Resources (ASA/OHR):
Develops Department-wide policy and guidance regarding HHS-wide Title 42 human resources authorities consistent with HHS policy and all applicable federal laws and regulations;
Reviews SBRBPAS allocation requests from OpDivs/StaffDivs and makes recommendations to the Secretary or designee via the Assistant Secretary for Administration (ASA);
Reviews pay requests exceeding $275,000 per annum and make recommendations to the Secretary or designee via the ASA;
Notifies the Secretary or designee of reorganizations that result in the elimination of SBRBPAS functions/positions;
Serves as the liaison with the General Accountability Office regarding studies required by P.L. 114-255; and
Periodically reviews PHS Components’ SBRBPAS procedures, actions, and reports to assure conformance with this Instruction and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Heads:
Ensure their division’s SBRBPAS allocations are utilized by law, regulations, and this Instruction.
Have the delegated authority to:
Request approval by the Secretary or designee, via ASA/OHR, for SBRBPAS allocations.
Approve the appointment of SBRBPAS members consistent with the eligibility and qualifications requirements described in this Instruction.
Approve initial pay and pay adjustments of SBRBPAS members up to $275,000 per annum consistent with the criteria in this Instruction.
Request approval by the Secretary or designee, via ASA/OHR, for annual pay for member(s) over $275,000 per annum.
Discipline or remove an SBRBPAS member for cause by the procedures in this Instruction.
Appoint a former SBRBPAS member who is removed without cause to a position covered by Title 5 by the criteria in this Instruction.
Approvals for the actions specified under this section (42-3-40 C. 2.) must be in writing.
Notify ASA/OHR of reorganization or workforce restructuring efforts that eliminate SBRBPAS functions/positions.
Recommend a representative from their division to serve on the SBRBPAS Policy Board if the Secretary or designee establishes a board.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Human Resources (HR) Centers:
Comply with this Instruction and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Provide an open, systematic, and equitable hiring process that ensures SBRBPAS positions are filled based on merit.
Establish peer review committee(s) to review the qualifications of SBRBPAS candidates.
Ensure SBRBPAS employees’ qualifications are certified prior to initial appointment by a peer review committee.
42-3-50           POLICY BOARD
A Policy Board may be established by the Secretary or designee to advise on allocation management, administration of the SBRBPAS authority and to ensure the SBRBPAS regulations, policy, and procedural guidelines are consistently applied and adhered to. The Board may provide recommendations on allocation requests and distribution among the participating OpDiv/StaffDivs, and any other matter as determined by the Secretary or designee. (42 CFR §24.3)
If a board is established, membership will include the Office of Assistant Secretary of Administration and the OpDivs/StaffDivs with SBRBPAS allocations. The Board shall consist of the Assistant Secretary for Administration or designee, who will serve as the Board’s chairperson, and the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources or designee. Each participating OpDiv/StaffDiv will have one (1) representative nominated by their OpDiv/StaffDiv Head or designee, serving two (2) year terms. The chairperson may renew the terms upon request of the OpDiv/StaffDiv. Representatives should have familiarity with the SBRBPAS authority, regulations, procedural guidelines, and this Instruction.
42-3-60           ALLOCATION MANAGEMENT
SBRBPAS allocations1 directly support HHS’ biomedical research, clinical research evaluation, and biomedical product assessment goals and priorities.
The Secretary or designee approves the assignment of SBRBPAS allocations within OpDivs/StaffDivs and may adjust allocation assignments (42 CFR §24.2).
A minimum of five percent (5%) of total SBRBPAS allocations are reserved for critical hires to address mission-critical needs, new HHS initiatives, Congressional priorities, etc.
Allocation assignments are as follows: AHRQ 16; CDC 103; FDA 373; NIH 1261; Reserved 247, as of the date of this Instruction.
SBRBPAS allocation requests are submitted by the Head of the OpDiv/StaffDiv to the Secretary via the ASA/OHR for approval.
The Secretary or designee is notified of workforce restructuring efforts and/or reorganizations that will eliminate SBRBPAS functions/positions. (Reorganizations also require notification to labor organizations when impacted employees are bargaining unit employees.) Allocations supporting such eliminated missions/functions are returned to the HHS SBRBPAS reserve pool. However, in cases where the former mission/function is replaced by a new mission/function that requires scientific and technical experts in the fields of biomedical research, clinical research evaluation, or biomedical product assessment within the same OpDiv/StaffDiv, the division may retain the allocations upon request.
42-3-70           APPOINTMENT PROCEDURES
Citizenship. HHS, along with many other federal agencies receiving appropriated funds, is restricted by the annual appropriations act from compensating an individual who is not a U.S. Citizen or national of the United States for a federal position. (Note: 42 U.S.C. §237 differs from 42 U.S.C. §§209(f) and (g). 42 U.S.C. §209(h) authorizes the employment of an individual who is not a U.S. Citizen or national of the United States to 42 U.S.C. §§209(f) and (g) positions that otherwise would be prohibited by the annual appropriations act ban on the compensation of non-citizens. No such language is in 42 U.S.C. §237.) HR Centers should consult their legal counsel to identify and comply with annual agency-specific appropriations restrictions and exclusions related to hiring an individual who is not a U.S. citizen for an SBRBPAS position.
Classification. In accordance with 42 U.S.C. §237(b), SBRBPAS positions are not covered by the classification provisions of Title 5 (5 U.S.C. Chapter 51); however, in the absence of HHS SBRBPAS Classification Standards for scientific and medical positions and until such standards are developed and validated, SBRBPAS job series are determined using the OPM Position Classification Standards. Official position descriptions are not required; however, a statement of duties certified by the supervisor must be issued, which must contain the major duties and responsibilities in the field(s) of biomedical research, clinical research evaluation, or biomedical product assessment to support the series to which the position is being classified, including supervisory controls. See also I., Personnel Actions below.
Eligibility and Qualification Requirements.
To be eligible for an SBRBPAS appointment, the individual must have a doctoral level degree in biomedicine or a related biological field, or a doctoral or master’s level degree in engineering, bioinformatics, or a related or emerging field and meet the OPM Qualification Standards for a General Schedule (GS) 15 level position in the applicable professional or scientific series (42 U.S.C. §237(b) and 42 CFR §24.4).
In addition, the individual must be considered an expert in at least one (1) of the following fields (42 CFR §24.4):
Biomedical research. An individual actively engaged in original biomedical research, including behavioral research, and whose work in this area is considered by recognized experts or peers in the field of biomedical research to be outstanding. One or more of the following achievements must be present to demonstrate the individual has received such recognition: the individual a) conducted original biomedical research published in peer-reviewed journals of high stature; b) received major prizes and awards (such as visiting professorships and named lectureships) in recognition of original contributions to biomedical research; c) received invitations to speak at or chair major national or international meetings or symposia; d) elected to membership in professional societies of high stature, or e) meets other criteria demonstrating sufficient rigor or accomplishment in a relevant or closely related field that is necessary to accomplish the OpDiv/StaffDiv’s mission.
Clinical research evaluation. An individual who is actively engaged in clinical research evaluation and whose work in this area is considered by recognized experts or peers in the field of clinical research evaluation to be outstanding. One or more of the following achievements must be present to demonstrate the individual has received such recognition: the individual a) has significant experience dealing with complex, precedent-setting evaluation issues, including those arising during product development that involved significant scientific controversy, had far-reaching implications for clinical research or resulted in a widespread economic effect in the health-care delivery system; b) has taken an active role in the development of significant scientific or regulatory guidelines for clinical research evaluation, c) received invitations to speak at or to chair major national or international meetings and symposia; or d) meets other criteria demonstrating sufficient rigor or accomplishment in a relevant or closely related field that is necessary to the achievement of the OpDiv/StaffDiv’s mission.
Biomedical product assessment. An individual who is actively engaged in the development or assessment of biomedical products and whose work in this area is considered by recognized experts or peers in the field of biomedical product assessment to be outstanding. One or more of the following achievements must be present to demonstrate the individual has received such recognition: the individual a) has significant experience dealing with complex, precedent-setting evaluation, scientific policies, or development issues (e.g., those associated with novel biomedical products, novel approaches to the biomedical product- manufacturing, or use of novel evaluation methods); b) demonstrated cutting-edge expertise in a scientific or technical discipline critical to design, development, manufacturing, clinical performance assessment, or technical aspects of effective oversight of biomedical products; c) played a leadership role in planning and conducting public meetings to seek public input and communicate scientific, regulatory policies; d) received invitations to speak at or chair major national or international meets and symposia; or e) meets other criteria demonstrating sufficient rigor or accomplishment in a relevant or closely related activity or field that is necessary to the achievement of the OpDiv/StaffDiv’s mission.
Recruitment Procedures.
SBRBPAS is specifically exempt by 42 U.S.C. §237(b) from the Title 5 appointment procedures (5 U.S.C. Chapter 33, Subchapter I); however, SBRBPAS positions are filled based on merit.
OpDivs/StaffDivs are responsible for ensuring SBRBPAS candidates meet this Instruction's eligibility and qualification requirements. The servicing Human Resources Office should conduct an initial evaluation prior to the peer review committee review (see E., Peer Review Committee below) to ensure candidates are eligible for consideration.
Candidates must furnish proof (i.e., official transcripts) that they meet the education and other (e.g., professional licensure) requirements before the appointment. Foreign-educated candidates from certain countries may be unable to provide official transcripts. If necessary, a copy of the diploma with an official English translation may be accepted in those cases. However, if the diploma does not indicate the specific field in which the doctorate was awarded, an official transcript, with an official translation, is required.
Post-high school education or training must meet the criteria described under ‘Educational and Training Provisions’ in OPM’s General Schedule Qualification Policy. (Note: Foreign education must meet these education and training provisions; and be evaluated by one (1) of the following national associations of credential evaluation services: National Association of Credential Evaluation Services (NACES) or Association of International Credentials Evaluators (AICE). In lieu of an evaluation, possession of a valid and current U.S. professional license by a graduate of a foreign professional school or program is sufficient proof that the foreign education has been determined to be equivalent to the requisite U.S. professional education in that occupational field.)
Official job offers are made by OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Centers, contingent upon satisfactory completion of all employment requirements, e.g., security, ethics clearance for positions required to file a Public Financial Disclosure Report, etc.
Peer Review Committee. To provide an open, systemic, and equitable hiring process that ensures positions are filled based on merit, an individual may not be considered for an SBRBPAS appointment unless a peer has reviewed his/her qualifications review committee that certifies the individual meets the eligibility and qualification requirements for the position and recommends appointment to the Service.
SBRBPAS candidate qualifications are evaluated by OpDiv/StaffDiv’s peer review committee before the initial appointment. OpDivs/StaffDivs may use single or multiple committees to determine if the SBRBPAS candidate meets the qualification requirements.
Committee(s) shall consist of at least three (3) current and/or former SBRBPAS members (former SBRBPAS members shall not have been removed for cause and must be current employees of the OpDiv/StaffDiv or another PHS component) who are subject matter experts in the same or related field of the position (i.e., expert knowledge of the competencies needed to perform the position).
Committee members must not be bargaining unit employees.
The committee must provide a written recommendation/certification based on the candidate’s education and professional experience.
The committee’s recommendation must be based on a majority of the members.
Committee members must recuse themselves from serving on committees in which they are a relative (as defined by 5 U.S.C. §3110) or have a personal relationship with one (1) or more candidates.
Peer review recommendations are retained by OpDiv/StaffDiv in the recruitment case file. See also Section 42-3-110, Documentation.
Conversions From Other Pay Systems.
HHS employees may be converted to the SBRBPAS if they meet all eligibility and qualification requirements in this Instruction and are peer-reviewed according to the requirements outlined in this Instruction. Conversions should only be considered in exceptional circumstances, such as the retention of an employee who possesses hard-to-fill mission-critical competencies or a special need for the employee’s services that makes it essential to retain the employee. Justification for the conversion must be documented on the SF-50, Notification of Personnel Action form.
Employees lose appeal rights upon conversion to the SBRBPAS since the SBRBPAS is not covered by the Title 5 provisions dealing with adverse actions (5 U.S.C. Chapter 75) or performance-based removal actions (5 U.S.C. Chapter 43). (See also Section 42-3-100, Removals). Employees serving on a Career SES or Scientific/Senior Level (ST/SL) appointments are additionally impacted upon conversion to the SBRBPAS (see Benefits under Section 42-3-80, Compensation). The employee must be notified in writing of the changes and must provide a written statement before conversion acknowledging he/she is voluntarily leaving his/her current position to accept an SBRBPAS position under 42 U.S.C §237.
Employees who previously held a non-temporary competitive service position or a Career SES position retain their career status and may continue to apply to competitive service positions open to ‘Status’ candidates. (They should be advised to provide an SF-50 showing they previously held a non-temporary competitive service position when applying to jobs.)
Type of Appointment. SBRBPAS employees may be appointed to temporary, intermittent, or permanent excepted service positions. Appointments to the excepted service do not give competitive status.
Trial Period. SBRBPAS employees serve at the will of the agency, in accordance with 42 U.S.C. §237(b), and do not serve trial or probationary periods. See also Section 42-3-100, Removals.
Personnel Actions.
When processing personnel actions, OPM’s Guide to Processing Personnel Actions, Chapter 11, Excepted Service Appointments, is used, and 42 U.S.C §237 must be cited as the excepted service authority that authorizes the SBRBPAS appointment.
The SBRBPAS pay plan is ‘RS’ in accordance with OPM’s Guide to Data Standards. Series is determined in accordance with OPM’s Position Classification Standards. No General Schedule grade is assigned in accordance with 42 U.S.C. §237. 
For consistency and reporting purposes, the official basic position title for non-supervisory work is SBRBPAS Expert.
Add the prefix Supervisory if the work meets the criteria for supervisor or manager as defined in the General Schedule Supervisory Guide (Supervisory Code 2.)
Add the prefix Lead if the work meets the criteria for the leader as defined in the General Schedule Leader Grade Evaluation Guide (Supervisory Code 7.)
Add the suffix Manager if the position meets the definition of supervisor in 5 U.S.C. 7103(a)(10) but does not meet the minimum requirements for application of the General Schedule Supervisory Guide.  (Supervisory Code 4)
Parenthetical titles may supplement the authorized position titles if necessary for recruitment or other human resources needs.
Organizational and functional titles complement official position titles and may be established for internal administration, public convenience, program management, or similar purposes.
42-3-80           COMPENSATION
Pay System and Aggregate Limit on Pay.
SBRBPAS is specifically exempt from the provisions of Title 5 relating to the General Schedule pay rates (5 U.S.C. Chapter 53, Subchapter III).
SBRBPAS has an ungraded pay system with a single flexible pay band that applies to each member. Annual pay for SBRBPAS members is administratively determined on a case-by-case basis. Base pay shall not be less than the minimum rate payable for the GS-15 of the General Schedule base table nor exceed the president’s pay, excluding expenses, as specified in 3 U.S.C. §1022. There is no authority to defer pay exceeding the pay cap to a subsequent calendar year.
Pay at the higher end of the pay range should be established only to recognize individual scientific value and expertise necessary to recruit and retain exceptionally well-qualified scientists and technical experts in one of the fields identified in this Instruction (42 CFR §24.5(a)). See Eligibility and Qualification Requirements under Section 42-3-70, Appointment Procedures.
Setting Pay, Including Pay Increases.
The OpDiv/StaffDiv Head is authorized to set annual pay, including pay increases, for SBRBPAS members up to $275,000 per annum. Annual pay exceeding this
The amount must be approved in writing by the Secretary or designee before its effective date.
Pay determinations must document the following criteria (42 CFR §24.5):
Impact of the individual on the field of biomedical research, clinical research evaluation, or biomedical product assessment;
Recognition of the individual by his/her peers in the respective field;
Originality of the individual’s ideas or work products;
Specific clinical or highly technical skills of the individual that are of benefit to the division and are in addition to the requirements of the basic scientific assignment;
The individual’s current earnings and monetary benefits; and
Other relevant factors.
Performance-based increases must be consistent with each member’s annual performance appraisal and are limited to one (1) such increase in a calendar year. Justifications for performance-based increases outside of the normal performance cycle must discuss with specificity the precise achievements of the member that form the basis for the increase. Generally, performance-based increases are capped at 6%. However, increases exceeding this amount may be approved, and the member’s achievements that form the basis for the higher rate are documented.
SBRBPAS members are not entitled to an automatic annual cost of living increases except to avoid a member’s pay falling below the minimum rate payable for the GS- 15 of the General Schedule base table. However, with the advice of the Policy Board, the Secretary or designee may implement an across-the-board annual cost of living increase, the rate of which is at the Secretary’s discretion, subject to the pay limitations in this Instruction. The effective date of such an increase is the first day of the first pay period on or after January 1 of the upcoming calendar year (42 CFR §24.5(c)).
Pay adjustments pay will take effect on the first day of the first pay period following approval from the approving authority unless a later date is specified.
SBRBPAS annual pay is pay for all purposes.
Other Compensation. SBRBPAS members are eligible for incentives (including recruitment, relocation, and retention incentives under 5 CFR Part 575) and awards unless precluded explicitly by statute or regulations.
Benefits. SBRBPAS employees are eligible for all federal civil service benefits such as life and health insurance, dental and vision insurance, retirement, Flexible Spending Accounts, Long Term Care Insurance, and leave, etc. Benefits available for SBRBPAS employees on time-limited appointments may vary depending on the length of their appointment. There is no impact on federal benefits, leave accrual, etc., for most employees when moving to/from SBRBPAS and Title 5 competitive/excepted services. However, SES Career employees will not retain SES benefits, e.g., Presidential Rank Awards, when converted to SBRBPAS. Former SES Career and Scientific/Senior Level (ST/SL) employees are not entitled to the higher SES/ST/SL annual leave accrual rate, and their new leave accrual rate is determined based on his/her years of creditable service upon conversion to SBRBPAS (5 CFR §630.301(d)). In accordance with 5 CFR §630.301(g), any accumulated annual leave exceeding the 240-hour maximum will remain available for the employee’s use subject to reduction under procedures identical to those described in 5 U.S.C. §6304(c).
42-3-90           PERFORMANCE
In accordance with 42 U.S.C. §237(b), SBRBPAS positions are not covered by the provisions of Title 5 relating to performance appraisal and performance actions (5 U.S.C. Chapter 43); however, SBRBPRS members are covered by the HHS Performance Management Appraisal Program (PMAP) which provides a systematic appraisal of performance and encourages excellence in performance by members, as required by 42 U.S.C. §237(c) and 42 CFR §24.6.
See HHS Instruction, 430-1, Performance Management Appraisal Program, for policy guidance.

42-3-100           REMOVALS
The Head of the OpDiv/StaffDiv may authorize disciplinary action, including removal from SBRBPAS, for substandard performance, misconduct, national security reasons, or other reasons as determined by the OpDiv/StaffDiv Head (42 CFR §24.8). This authority may not be redelegated.
SBRBPAS employees are not covered by the Title 5 provisions dealing with adverse actions (5 U.S.C. Chapter 75) or performance-based removal actions (5 U.S.C. Chapter (42 U.S.C. §237(b)); however, in accordance with the provisions outlined in 42 CFR §24.8, an SBRBPAS employee for whom a disciplinary action is proposed is entitled to:
A written notice of the proposed action and the basis of the action;
A reasonable opportunity to respond to the notice of proposed action both orally and in writing;
The right to be represented by an attorney or other representative in making such an answer; and
A written decision on the proposed action.
This process may not be appealed to a third party, and there is no right to further review an adverse action's final decision. At his/her discretion, the Secretary may review an action taken and may reduce, suspend, or overrule the action taken by the OpDiv/StaffDiv Head (42 CFR §24.8).
SBRBPAS employees have no right to appeal to the Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB). Servicing Employee Relations staff must be consulted prior to any adverse or performance-based action of an SBRBPAS employee to ensure compliance with applicable federal laws, regulations, HHS policy, and bargaining unit obligations.
SBRBPAS employees are not covered by Title 5 provisions relating to retention preference in a Reduction in Force (RIF) or Chapter 35, Subchapter I (42 U.S.C. §237(b)). In a RIF, SBRBPAS employees may be released prior to a RIF as part of an OpDiv/StaffDiv’s workforce restructuring efforts to avoid a RIF, or alternatively, an OpDiv/StaffDiv may choose not to separate all or any SBRBPAS employees before or during a RIF. Decisions regarding which SBRBPAS functions/positions to abolish before or during a RIF must be based on mission and/or budget. The Secretary or designee must be notified of proposed workforce restructuring efforts and/or reorganizations that eliminate SBRBPAS functions/positions. See also Section 42-3-60, Allocation Management.
An SBRBPAS employee who is removed from the Service involuntarily and without cause may be non-competitively appointed by the OpDiv/StaffDiv Head to a position in the competitive service at the GS-15 grade level if that employee was a career employee in the competitive service or the SES immediately prior to his/her SBRBPAS appointment. An employee who was not a career employee in the competitive service or the SES immediately before their appointment to the SBRBPAS may be placed in a GS- 15 excepted service position not to exceed two years (42 U.S.C. §237(e) and 5 CFR §24.8). These appointment actions are discretionary; however, if non-competitively appointed, such employees must meet the OPM Qualification Requirements for the series/grade of the new position.
42-3-110           DOCUMENTATION, REPORTING, AND ACCOUNTABILITY
Documentation. Records associated with personnel actions, including all documentation sufficient for third-party reconstruction purposes, must be retained according to the National Archives & Records Administration (NARA) record disposition schedule. Generally, all records created in a given year must be retained for three (3) full years. Records involved in litigation and grievance processes may be destroyed only after the official notification from OPM, the Department of Justice, or the Office of the General Counsel, etc., that the matter has been fully litigated or resolved and closed.
Reporting. Consistent with 42 CFR §24.9:
OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Centers will submit an initial report to ASA/OHR at employmentpolicy@hhs.gov by September 30, 2020. Reports must be submitted annually after that by September 30 and include the following information:
An analysis of the extent to which the recruitment and retention of outstanding and qualified scientific, medical, or technical experts in the fields of biomedical, medical research, clinical research evaluation, and biomedical product assessment have improved or otherwise been affected by the amendments in the 21st Century Cures Act (Public Law 114-255), including if the authority is allowing the OpDiv/StaffDiv to obtain the necessary expertise, and if any changes to the current law/regulations are needed.
The total number of SBRBPAS members who have been hired by the division, including first and last name; position title; occupational series; field (biomedical research, clinical research evaluation, or biomedical product assessment); doctoral or master’s degree; and date of peer review committee certification.
Source of recruitment for each SBRBPAS member. If the member was converted from another pay system, identify title/series/grade; and
The earnings of each member immediately prior to appointment to the SBRBPAS and pay upon appointment.
ASA/OHR may request additional information from each participating OpDiv/StaffDiv to assist the Policy Board or the Secretary (or designee) on allocation management and analysis of SBRBPAS operations; to ensure consistent application of the law, regulations, and this Instruction; and to recommend legislative changes to the Secretary as necessary.
Accountability. ASA/OHR will conduct periodic accountability reviews to analyze compliance with this Instruction and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Endnotes
1 2000 in accordance with 42 U.S.C. §237

2 $400,000 per annum as of the date of this Instruction.












511-1
Instruction 511-1: Position Classification
Issuance Date:
May 16, 2018

Material Transmitted:
HHS Instruction 511-1, Position Classification, dated 05/16/2018

Material Superseded:
HHS Instruction 511-1, Position Classification, dated February 15, 2013.

Background:
This Instruction has been revised to clarify the roles in the classification appeals process, provide guidance on position management and classification reviews, and address the Fair Labor Standards Act. 

This issuance is effective immediately and must be carried out in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, bargaining agreements, and Departmental policy.

/s/

Christine M. Major
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources
Chief Human Capital Officer

511-1-00: Purpose
This Instruction outlines the policies, requirements, and responsibilities for administering the Department’s position classification, job grading, and position management programs, consistent with federal law, regulations, and the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) guidance.

511-1-10: References
5 U.S.C., Chapter 51, Classification 
5 U.S.C., Chapter 53, Pay Rates and Systems 
5 C.F.R. § 511, Subpart F, Classification Appeals
5 C.F.R. § 511, Subpart G, Effective Dates of Position Classification Actions or Decisions   
5 C.F.R. § 532, Subparts F, Job Grading System
5 C.F.R. § 532, Subpart G, Job Grading Reviews and Appeals
5 C.F.R. § 551, Subpart G, FLSA Claims and Compliance 
OPM Handbook of Occupational Groups and Families, May 2009 - PDF
Introduction to the Position Classification Standards, August 2009 - PDF
The Classifier’s Handbook, August 1991 - PDF
General Schedule Supervisory Guide, April 1998 - PDF
Federal Wage System Job Grading System, September 1981 - PDF
Federal Wage System Job Grading Standard for Supervisors, December 1992 - PDF
HHS Instruction 511-2, Use of Career Ladder Positions, December 2008 - PDF
HHS Instruction 511-3, Non-competitive Promotion Based on Reclassification (Accretion of Duties), October 2011 - PDF
511-1-20 Coverage and Exclusions
Coverage.  All HHS General Schedule (GS) and Federal Wage System (FWS) positions subject to the provisions of 5 C.F.R. §§ 511 and 532.
Exclusions.
Senior Executive Service (SES), Scientific and Professional (ST), Senior-Level (SL) positions
Positions covered by authorities specifically exempt from 5 U.S.C. Chapter 51 , Classification
Bargaining Unit Employees. The provisions of this Instruction pertaining to conditions of employment of bargaining unit employees are fully negotiable in accordance with 5 U.S.C. § Chapter 71 . Therefore, when the provisions of this Instruction differ from the requirements contained in applicable collective bargaining agreement(s), the agreement takes precedence for bargaining unit employees.
511-1-30 Definitions
Appellant. An employee who has submitted a classification appeal.
Classification Appeal. A classification appeal is a written petition from an employee, or his/her written designated representative, for a change in the classification of his/her current position of record.
Classification Appeal Decision. A classification appeal decision is the written determination and justification of HHS’s or OPM’s final classification of an appealed position.
Desk Audit.  An evaluation of a particular position to determine whether duties and responsibilities correspond to the actual job classification and salary grade. An employee or supervisor can request a desk audit, or they may be conducted as part of a position classification review program.
Employee Representative. An employee may designate a representative of his/her choice to assist in the preparation and presentation of a classification appeal. The representative is free from restraint, interference, coercion, or reprisal for performing representative duties.
Federal Wage System. A classification and pay system that covers appropriated fund and nonappropriated fund employees who are paid by the hour and work in trades, craft, and labor occupations.
FLSA Exempt Employee. One who is not covered by the minimum wage and overtime provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA or Act).
FLSA Nonexempt Employee. One who is covered by the minimum wage and overtime provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA or Act).
Grade. The numerical designation, GS−1 through GS−15, which identifies the range of difficulty and responsibility, and level of qualification requirements of positions included in the General Schedule.
General Schedule.  A classification and pay system covering the majority of civilian federal employees in professional technical, administrative, and clerical positions. 
Job Family. A broad grouping of trades, craft, and labor occupations related by similar functions; materials or equipment used; or knowledge and skills required.
Position Description (PD). A PD documents the major duties and responsibilities of a position assigned by management.
Occupational Group.  A major category of white-collar occupations, covering a group of associated or closely related occupations in the General Schedule (e.g., the Accounting and Budget Group, GS−500; the Engineering and Architecture Group, GS−800; the General Administrative, Clerical, and Office Services Group, GS−300, etc.).
Series.  A subdivision of an occupational group or job family consisting of positions with similar specialized line of work and qualification requirements, and identified by a position title and number (series).
511-1-40 Responsibilities
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources (DASHR), Office of Human Resources (OHR):
Develops Department-wide policy and guidance regarding position classification in accordance with HHS and OPM policy, procedures, and guidance and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Makes determinations on all classification appeals submitted to HHS, in accordance with regulatory requirements.
Makes determinations on FLSA claims filed with HHS.
Reviews and submits any Administrative Law Judge classification issues identified by Operating and Staff Divisions (OpDiv/StaffDivs) to OPM for action.
Periodically reviews OpDiv/StaffDiv position classification programs.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Human Resources Offices (OHROs):
Comply with this Instruction, any HHS and OPM policy, procedures guidance and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Ensure GS and FWS positions are accurately classified in accordance with published OPM position classification standards by creating PDs which clearly distinguish each position's appropriate title, series, and grade.
Ensure assignments reflect application of sound position management principles, including organizing work in an efficient, effective manner and using resources economically to carry out the missions of their organizations.
Establish a classification review program and regularly review its OpDiv/StaffDiv position descriptions to ensure accuracy.
Adhere to HHS Instruction 511-3, Noncompetitive Promotion Based on Reclassification or Accretion of Duties, when considering exceptions to the merit promotion procedures.
Obtain written concurrence from the Office of General Counsel (OGC) prior to classifying Attorney, GS-0905, positions outside of OGC.
Obtain written concurrence from the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs (ASPA) prior to classifying Public Affairs Specialists, GS-1035-14 and above, positions.
Obtain written concurrence from the Office of the Inspector General prior to classifying Criminal Investigator, GS-1811, positions.
Ensure employees have copies of their PDs and objectively, expeditiously, and fairly consider employee concerns regarding the accuracy of their PDs, the classification of their positions, and classification appeals.
Submits supplemental information to OHR for classification appeals to HHS; notifies the HHS OHR Classification Manager immediately upon knowledge of an employee’s classification appeal to OPM; and provides OHR a copy of OPM’s decision, as applicable.
Makes FLSA determinations at the time of classification, and forwards FLSA claims filed with HHS, along with supplemental information, to OHR for decision.
511-1-50 Position Management
By law, agencies are given the authority and responsibility to establish, classify, and manage their own positions. Supervisors and managers play major roles in the management and classification of subordinate positions. As a result, they are responsible for assuring a sound position structure in the organizations they lead to ensure the effective use of limited financial and personnel resources. 
Good position management can be defined as a carefully designed position structure which blends the skills and assignments of employees in order to successfully carry out the organization's mission or program while maintaining a cost-effective operation. 
Sound position management reflects a logical balance between the employees needed to carry out the major functions of the organizational unit and those needed to provide adequate support; between professional employees and technicians; between fully trained employees and trainees; and between supervisors and subordinates.
Good position management also requires consideration of grade levels of the positions involved. Grades should be commensurate with the work performed to accomplish the organization's mission and should not exceed those grades needed to perform the work of the unit. A carefully designed position structure results in reasonable and supportable grade levels.
In accordance with 5 CFR 335.103 and HHS Instruction 511-3, Noncompetitive Promotion Based on Reclassification or Accretion of Duties, HRDs may exclude certain promotions from the competitive procedures in very specific circumstances (i.e., the reclassification of a position without significant change in the duties and responsibilities due to issuance of a new classification standard or the correction of an initial classification error, or accretion of duties due to the addition of substantive higher graded responsibilities). Such actions should be rare and used only in situations where a strong basis for an exception to the competitive promotion process exists. Competitive procedures must be followed when these circumstances are not explicitly met and documented.
While there is no supervisor to employee ratio required by OPM, supervisors must perform supervisory duties at least 25% of their time. Supervisory duties are defined in the General Schedule Supervisory Guide (GSSG) - PDF. OpDiv/StaffDivs must determine the appropriate ratio of managerial and supervisory positions to non-supervisory workers and prevent the excessive layering of supervision and unwarranted use of support positions. The appropriate ratio of professional, technical, clerical and wage positions consistent with the proportion of such work occurring in the organization must also be decided.
511-1-60 Position Descriptions
PD.  OHROs are responsible to ensure jobs are accurately classified in accordance with published OPM position classification standards by creating PDs - or utilizing standardized positions descriptions when available - which clearly distinguish each position's appropriate title, series, and grade.

An accurate and current statement of the major duties, responsibilities, and supervisory relationships must be developed and maintained for each position covered by this Instruction. The PD of each position must be kept up to date and include information about the job which is significant to its classification.
Non-supervisory GS positions.  In order to maintain uniformity throughout HHS, PDs for non-supervisory positions shall be prepared in either the narrative or factor evaluation system (FES) format as appropriate. The FES format must be used when the classification of the position is based on a FES standard.
Non-supervisory FWS positions. FWS positions are classified using the FWS Job Grading System - PDF to determine the occupational series, title, grade, and pay system for positions performing trades, craft, and labor work. See Classifying Federal Wage System Positions for more details.
Supervisory Positions. All first and second level supervisory positions must be described in the supervisory format, which will facilitate comparison with OPM’s General Schedule Supervisory Guide (GSSG) - PDF or FWS Job Grading Standard for Supervisors - PDF, as appropriate.
Evaluation Statement. An evaluation statement is a written record of the rationale used to classify and grade a position. Evaluation statements are designed to provide consistency and continuity in classification and grading decisions. Extensive statements are required when the evaluation of the factor is not self-evident by reference to the appropriate standard.
Narrative Evaluation Statements. The length, in-depth discussion, and format of an evaluation statement should be tailored to the individual classification decision. The evaluation statement should include a concise, but thorough comparison of the grade-controlling duties and responsibilities consistent with the classification standard(s) used to evaluate the position. It should show how the assignment meets, exceeds, or falls short of the various classification elements and factors in the standard. Exhibit A provides an example narrative evaluation statement format.
FES Evaluation Statements. For positions classified by reference to a FES standard, the level and point values for each factor and the GS grade must be shown on the FES form in the Evaluation Statement. Exhibit A provides an example FES evaluation statement format.
Career Ladder Positions. For positions that are identified as career ladders, OpDivs/StaffDivs may choose to write a Statement of Difference that clearly defines the significant differences of a developmental position, or may write a complete PD for each grade level. A Statement of Difference should be used for no more than two grade levels below an official full performance level PD.
Each career ladder position should clearly define significant differences in assigned duties and responsibilities and supervisory relationships from the full performance position.
Each PD must contain sufficient information to support a valid classification action and permit the development of relevant performance standards. Whenever substantial revisions are made to the full performance position, the career ladder PDs/Statement of Difference(s) must be reviewed for potential changes.
An official classified PD includes:
A certified Optional Form (OF)-8 - PDF, as a PD coversheet, signed by the immediate supervisor and the HR Classifier, at a minimum;
PD (see Exhibit A for samples);
An evaluation statement with applicable OPM references used to classify a position (see Exhibit A for samples);
Employee bargaining unit status form, as applicable
A Position Sensitivity Designation form (PDAT), signed by the supervisor confirming accuracy of employee’s duties/responsibilities;
A completed “FLSA Status Determination Questionnaire for Managers and Supervisors” properly completed and signed by the first line supervisor (Exhibit B); and
A completed “HHS FLSA Classifier Checklist” properly completed and signed by the Classifier (Exhibit C).
The original copy of the classified PD is maintained by the OHRO. Copies of the official description shall be provided to the organization and to each employee assigned to the position. Supervisors are responsible for assuring employees are given a copy of their current PD.
PD Review.  OpDiv/StaffDivs should review all PDs under their jurisdiction bi-annually to ensure that they are current and accurate. This review shall include a review of the position sensitivity designation; bargaining unit status; and FLSA Status Determination Questionnaire for Managers and Supervisors, in consultation with the OHRO.

The classification of a vacant position should also be reviewed before action is taken to fill it, since this represents the best opportunity to take any corrective action required. Identical/additional positions which are filled frequently should be reviewed often to ensure their accuracy.
Desk Audits.  Desk audits to determine whether duties and responsibilities correspond to the actual job classification and salary grade are necessary for a variety of reasons, e.g., recent establishment of a new position, which may be based on projected duties; introduction of new technology affecting major duties of a position; new OPM classification standards; apparent accretion/erosion of grade controlling duties, or at the request of an employee or supervisor. Desk audits may be conducted during a classification review by the specialist responsible for classifying the position, or for individual classification actions. A background statement about the desk audit should be addressed in the evaluation statement. A desk audit does not need to be conducted for each classification action. The number and frequency of audits depend on local classification needs.  Note: If a new position is established based on projected duties, the position should be audited approximately six months after it is filled to ensure the PD accurately describes the duties that are being performed by the incumbent.
511-1-70 Position Classification Reviews
Each OpDiv/StaffDiv must establish a classification review program/plan to ensure that the classification accuracy requirements of 5 U.S.C. 5107  are met within their division. There are a wide variety of situations which could necessitate a classification review. Some indicators of the appropriate timing for such reviews include:
Most efficient organization (MEO) studies;
Changes in mission and functions;
Change in organization structures;
Realignment of duties and responsibilities; or
Other applicable circumstances.
The position classification review plan includes the specific responsibilities of the OHRO, supervisors and managers, and the types of organizational or operational events which indicate the need for classification reviews.
Post audit reviews of the classification of individual positions or organizational components can be conducted by OHROs at any time as special needs are identified by line management.
The scope of the classification reviews, as well as the frequency, should be tailored to the needs of the individual organization. A review could cover a section within a service/division/etc. or a group of services/divisions/etc., or it could comprise positions in an occupational group, e.g., technical support positions, computer-related positions, etc.
The classification of each position under review shall be evaluated and certified as correct by an official with HR authority to classify the positions involved. Desk audits are conducted and evaluation statements prepared as deemed necessary by the appropriate delegated classification authority.
Adequate OHRO records shall be maintained to reflect the completion of the classification review, to include desk audit reports, supervisory conformance checks, etc. These records are subject to review during OHR Accountability audits or other visits.
An employee whose position is changed to a lower grade based as the result of a classification review is entitled to a prompt written notice from the OHRO, specifying the effective date. The notice shall also inform the employee of:
The employee’s right to submit an appeal to HHS (if it has the authority to take the action) or to OPM;
The information which must be provided to HHS or OPM supporting the appeal;
The time limits within which the employee must file an appeal in order to establish or preserve the right to retroactive adjustment in connection with a favorable decision; and
The employee’s entitlement to grade and/or pay retention under 5 U.S.C. 53, Subpart VI , sections 5362-5363.
OHROs are required to consult with the OHR Classification Program Manager on proposed classification actions affecting 20 or more substantially similar positions, prior to effecting the decisions. (For the purposes of this paragraph, the term "positions" refers to the number of employees.) Consultation is also required if fewer than 20 substantially similar positions are directly affected and it is anticipated that the decision will have a "ripple" effect on a significant number of other positions within HHS.
511-1-80 Implementing OPM Classification Standards
New or updated classification standards and/or classification guides must be applied to covered positions within 12 months of OPM’s issuance date, or by the date designated by OPM.
The following strategies may be considered when implementing new classification standards:
Apply first to new positions and positions under classification appeal.
Apply to vacant positions prior to initiating recruitment.
Apply standards to positions where a grade change is expected.
Process mass changes, as appropriate, rather than individual personnel actions.
Make pen-and-ink changes for minor revisions with no title, series, or grade impact.
Annotate the new classification standard on the OF-8, PD coversheet, in block 22.
If an employee, in a position covered by a new/revised classification standard, files an appeal prior to the implementation of the new OPM standard, the OHRO must immediately apply the new standard so the appeal can be properly adjudicated. See Section 511-1-100 for more information on the appeals process. 
If an OpDiv/StaffDiv has a valid reason for requesting an extension, a justification, including the requested extension timeframe; the reason for the extension; the number of positions impacted by the classification standard update; and any other pertinent information should be sent to OHR for review, approval, and if warranted, OHR will send the request forward to OPM. The request must be sent within 60 calendar days of notification from OPM of the new classification standard.
511-1-90 Classification of Special Series
GS-905 Attorney Positions, all grade levels
Attorney positions may not be established outside of the Office of the General Counsel (OGC) without the concurrence of OGC. (Note: In the Food and Drug Administration, the Office of Chief Counsel reports to the OGC’s Food and Drug Division and seeks approval directly from the OGC.  However, all other FDA Centers/Offices outside the OGC’s Food and Drug Division must obtain written approval from OGC to establish a new attorney position.) 
To request establishment of a new Attorney, GS-0905, position:
The OHRO conducts a preliminary review of the draft PD to ascertain if the position meets the series definition for an attorney and is properly classified to the GS-0905 series.
Once the OHRO approves the classification of the position,  a designated OpDiv/StaffDiv official submits the following information to the HHS OHR, Classification Program Manager at employmentpolicy@hhs.gov:
Signed cover memorandum endorsing the request and requesting OGC’s review and approval;
A justification that describes the need for the position; and
A draft PD signed by the requesting authority.
HHS OHR/Talent Acquisition Division (TAD) reviews and submits the information to OGC for concurrence.
OGC has 30 calendar days to review the request and concur in writing or deny the request with a written explanation. 
OGC returns the approved or denied PD to TAD for record keeping purposes and TAD returns the PD to the OpDiv/StaffDiv requestor. 
All documentation, including OGC concurrence must be attached to the final PD and maintained with the HRO for future reference as long as the PD remains active.
If an approved position is vacated and the PD and organization remains the same, HHS OHR and OGC do not need to review the position again. The OpDiv/StaffDiv has the authority to backfill the position without additional approval.
For more information, see HHS OHR Attorney Guidance – Classification, Qualifications, and Recruitment, TAD-002-2017.
GS-1035, Public Affairs Positions at the GS-14 level and above:
Public Affairs positions at the GS-1035-14 level and above may not be established outside of the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs (ASPA) without the concurrence of ASPA.
Requests are submitted to the HHS OHR Classification Manager, then reviewed and forwarded to ASPA for approval following the same procedures and requirements outlined for Attorney positions above.
GS-1811 Criminal Investigator Positions, all grade levels
Criminal Investigator, GS-1811, positions may not be established outside of the Office of the Inspector General (OIG) without the concurrence of the OIG.
Requests are submitted to the HHS OHR Classification Manager, then reviewed and forwarded to OIG for approval following the same procedures and requirements outlined for Attorney positions above.
GS-0935 Administrative Law Judge Positions. OPM retains the authority to establish all Administrative Law Judge positions, see https://www.opm.gov/services-for-agencies/administrative-law-judges/ .
511-1-100 Classification Appeals
In all cases, OHR serves as the adjudicating organization for all HHS classification appeals. Consistent with the Introduction to Position Classification Standards - PDF and 5 C.F.R. § 532.703(b)(7), agency classification appeal decisions are made one administrative level above the classification authority which classified the position(s).
An employee who is dissatisfied with the classification of their position should first discuss their concerns/issues with their immediate supervisor. If the supervisor is unable to resolve the issue to the employee's satisfaction, the employee should discuss their dissatisfaction with their servicing OHRO.
Current federal employees have the right to appeal the classification of their position based on grade, occupational series, or title of the position (see 5 C.F.R. § 511.607 for a complete description of non-appealable issues). Employees may also seek to have a GS position changed to the Federal Wage System (FWS) or a FWS position changed to the GS.
Employees covered under the General Schedule (5 C.F.R. Part 511) have the options of:
Appealing the occupational series, grade or title of the job to the HHS, Assistant Secretary for Administration (ASA), OHR; or
Appealing directly to OPM. (OHR shall be notified immediately upon knowledge of an employee's classification appeal to OPM.)
Employees who elect to appeal first to HHS may subsequently appeal to OPM if they are dissatisfied with the Department's appeal decision. However, employees may not appeal to HHS if they have previously appealed the same position to OPM. 
If an employee had previously filed a similar appeal to HHS on which a decision is pending, then appeals to OPM, the Department appeal is canceled and all parties notified by OHR.
If a GS employee is appealing an HHS decision or OPM classification certificate issued under 5 U.S.C. §§ 5103  or 5110, and has suffered a loss in grade  or pay , is not entitled to retained grade  or pay , and desires retroactive adjustments, the time limits in 5 C.F.R. § 511.703 must be observed. In order for the decision to be made retroactive, the employee must file the initial request for review with either HHS or OPM not later than 15 calendar days  after the effective date  of the reclassification action. If the appellate’ s decision raises the grade  of the position  above the original grade , retroactivity applies only to the extent of restoration to the original grade .
Employees covered under the Federal Wage System (5 C.F.R. Part 532) must:
First appeal to HHS/OHR. (FWS employees cannot appeal directly to OPM without appealing to their agency first.)
If the employee is dissatisfied with the decision of HHS, they may file an appeal with OPM, provided they do so within 15 calendar days of receipt of HHS’ decision. 
When an appeal involves a change to lower grade level or other job-grading action which resulted in a reduction in grade or loss of pay, in order to be entitled to a retroactive corrective action, and employee must request a review within 15 calendar days of the effective date of the change to lower grade (5 C.F.R. § 532.703(b)(3)). 
Employees may select a representative as outlined for GS employees under 5 C.F.R. § 511.608, and for FWS employees under 5 C.F.R. § 532.703(b)(4). Employees may have a representative (designated in writing) to help prepare and submit the appeal case, but the representative cannot be someone with management or classification authority over the position. When an OpDiv/StaffDiv disallows an employee's selected representative, the OHRO must notify the employee in writing and explain the reason(s).
OHR’s letter of decision constitutes a final decision within HHS. A classification appeal decision may be reopened and reconsidered by OHR when the employee presents material facts not previously considered.
An appeal decision by the Department or OPM can result in the appealed position's grade being raised, lowered, or sustained. The position's pay plan, title, series, or grade may be changed or sustained. Employees are advised by the appropriate OHRO of the effect an appeal decision has on the classification of the position and any other employees assigned to the same position.
511-1-110 Classification Appeal Filing Procedures
If an employee is appealing to HHS, appeals must be addressed in writing to the Director, Talent Acquisition Division, in OHR. The following information is submitted by the appellant or his/her representative via their servicing OHRO to employmentpolicy@hhs.gov:
A signed statement that the employee wishes to appeal the classification of his/her position;
Organization to which assigned;
Current position pay plan, title, series, and grade;
The requested pay plan, title, series, and/or grade;
A statement explaining how the official PD is inaccurate or a statement of how the duties performed differ from the official PD;
A statement with the reasons why the position should be classified differently. If the interpretation of a specific standard(s) is at issue, an analysis comparing the position with the pertinent standard(s) should be included; and
A written designation of third party representation if the appellant elects such representation. The designation must include the name, phone number, email address, and mailing address of the representative.
The following supplemental information should be submitted by the servicing OHRO to OHR at employmentpolicy@hhs.gov for appeals to HHS:
The PD (including the OF-8) to which the incumbent is assigned which meets standards of adequacy and which is consistent with the position evaluation statement;
A position evaluation statement which includes an in-depth comparison of the duties and responsibilities with published classification standards;
Organizational chart in which the position resides with pay plans, series, and grades;
Comments from the immediate supervisor (or higher level official) relative to the accuracy of the PD and the merits of the appeal;
Copies of all PDs for positions directly supervised or led by the appealed position, and supporting evaluation statement, if applicable; and
A copy of immediate supervisor's PD and evaluation statement, if applicable.
HHS must take action on appeals submitted to HHS within 60 calendar days (5 C.F.R. § 511.604). OHR will forward the appeal to OPM if the employee has directed the appeal to OPM and the HHS decision is not favorable; HHS is not authorized to act on the appeal; or HHS has not made a determination on the appeal within the 60 calendar day time period.
Appeals to OPM:
The employee or his/her designated representative, who must be designated in writing, should send the appeal to: U.S. Office of Personnel Management, Classification Appeals and FLSA Claims Program Manager,1900 E. ST NW Room 6484, Washington, DC 20415.
OPM requires the following information in writing and must be signed by the employee or his/her designated representative:
Employee name, mailing address, and commercial office telephone number;
The present classification of the employee’s position and the requested classification;
The name of the department or agency and the office in which the employee works;
The city where the employee is employed and the mailing address;
A copy of the employee’s official PD and either a statement affirming that it is accurate or a detailed explanation of the inaccuracies and an explanation of the efforts made to correct the PD;
Any additional information about the position that will aid in understanding it; and
Arguments supporting the requested classification by referencing the appropriate classification standards.
A duplicate copy of all material provided to OPM shall be forwarded through appropriate channels to OHR. Upon receipt of the OPM decision, a copy shall also be forwarded to OHR in order to complete the case file. OHROs maintain complete files on classification appeal adjudications under their jurisdiction.
Pending classification appeals are canceled by HHS if the appellant:
Requests in writing that his/her appeal be withdrawn or canceled;
No longer occupies the appealed position (except when the employee would be entitled to the retroactive benefits);
Does not furnish information required by the agency or otherwise does not proceed with the advancement of the appeal; or
An employee filed an appeal to HHS on which a decision is pending, and then appeals to OPM.
Reconsideration Requests
Appellants desiring to formally request reconsideration of a HHS or an OPM classification appeal decision should submit the request to OHR at employmentpolicy@hhs.gov within 45 days from the date of the decision.
Both HHS and OPM may reconsider appeals at its discretion if the request contains new material information or disagreements over the significance of information or when a written argument or evidence is presented that establishes reasonable doubt concerning the technical accuracy of the decision (5 C.F.R. § 511.613 for General Schedule and 5 C.F.R. § 532.705 (b)(f) for Federal Wage appeal reconsiderations). Reconsiderations may be used under circumstances where a written argument or evidence establishes that:
New and material evidence is available that was not readily available when the previous decision was issued;
The previous decision involves an erroneous interpretation of law or regulation or a misapplication of established policy; or
The previous decision is of a precedential nature involving a new or unreviewed policy consideration that may have effects beyond the actual case at hand, or is otherwise of such an exceptional nature as to merit the personal attention of the Director of OPM.
If the appellant is filing for reconsideration with HHS or OPM, the request must be in writing and filed not later than 45 calendar days after the decision is issued. Regardless if an employee is filing for reconsideration with HHS/OHR or OPM, a copy of all packages for reconsideration must be submitted to OHR.
Appeal Decisions
The appeal decision is provided in writing to the employee. A final decision by HHS or OPM constitutes a certificate which is mandatory and binding on all administrative, certifying, payroll, disbursing, and accounting officials of the Government.
Classification appeal decisions are implemented according to the provision(s) of 5 C.F.R. § 511.702 and 5 C.F.R. § 532.705 (a)(d).
511-1-120 Fair Labor Standards Act Determinations
The Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) sets minimum standards for wage and overtime entitlements and administrative procedures for which covered worktime must be compensated. All employees are covered by the Act, except for those listed under 5 C.F.R. 551.103.
All positions within the federal government must be designated as either “exempt” or “nonexempt” under the FLSA criteria identified in 5 C.F.R. 551. The exempt or nonexempt status of the position are identified as part of the employee's PD and annotated in block 7 of the OF-8.
Employees are presumed to be FLSA “nonexempt” unless a determination is made the employee clearly meets one or more of the exemption criteria as specified in 5 C.F.R. Part 551, Subpart B, and supplemental guidance issued by OPM. If the employee clearly meets the criteria for exemption, the FLSA “exempt” designation must be documented.
An exempt or nonexempt determination shall be made at the time of classification for each employee assigned to a position based on a comparison of the employee's actual duties performed with the exemption criteria outlined in OPM and Department of Labor guidelines. While official PDs and titles may assist in making initial FLSA exemption determinations, the designation of an employee as FLSA exempt or nonexempt must ultimately rest on the duties actually performed by the employee.
The exempt or nonexempt status of a position should be reviewed when it is established, redescribed, and classified based on significant changes in assigned duties, or in connection with a classification review.
If the exempt or nonexempt determination of an employee is inconsistent with the duties and responsibilities assigned in the official PD, it is necessary to either revise the PD, or ensure that the employee performs the duties and responsibilities as assigned in the PD.
For unencumbered positions, an initial determination must be made based on a comparison of the projected duties and responsibilities as assigned in the official PD with the exemption criteria. 
When making an FLSA determination, the OHRO must not presume a nonexempt or exempt status based on grade. Not all positions graded at GS-9 and below are nonexempt. While this can be used as a guide, HR specialists must analyze the duties and responsibilities for each determination.
In general, executive, administrative and professional employees, as well as employees performing a combination of exempt duties, are exempt from FLSA regulations.  However, this must be narrowly applied only to employees who are clearly within the terms and spirit of the exemption criteria. 
The supervisor is responsible for reviewing an employee’s duties and responsibilities and filling out the “FLSA Status Determination Questionnaire for Managers and Supervisors” (Exhibit B) and submitting it with the PD to the OHRO.
The OHRO must fill out the HHS FLSA Classifier Checklist (Exhibit C) and attach it to the official position description. The burden of proof as to the exempt or nonexempt status of an employee rests with the Department, not the employee. If the determination is not self-evident, the basis for the decision should be retained with the PD either as part of the evaluation report or as a separate document.
511-1-130 FLSA Claims
Note: OpDivs/StaffDivs should review their local or national collective bargaining agreement for specifically negotiated items or processes.

Employees who are dissatisfied with the FLSA coverage determination of their positions have the right to appeal the decision. It is recommended by OPM the employee first talk to their supervisor and/or OHRO to discuss their concerns about their FLSA determination.
Bargaining unit covered employees are required to use the negotiated grievance process and may not file an administrative FLSA claim with either HHS or OPM unless expressly excluded from the bargaining agreement.
Non-bargaining unit covered employees may file an FLSA claim either with HHS or with OPM; however, the same claim may not be pursued with both HHS and OPM at the same time. Employees who elect to submit a claim first to HHS may subsequently submit a claim to OPM if they are dissatisfied with the Department's decision. However, employees may not file with HHS if they have previously submitted the same claim to OPM. You may not file a claim with HHS after receiving an unfavorable decision from OPM. An OPM decision on a claim is final and is not subject to further administrative review.
All employees have the right to bring an action in an appropriate United States court. Filing a claim with HHS or with OPM does not stop the statute of limitations from running. OPM will not decide a claim that is in litigation.
In accordance with 5 C.F.R. § 551.702, all FLSA pay claims filed after June 30, 1994, are subject to a two-year statute of limitations (three years for willful violations). An employee must submit a written claim to either the employing agency or to OPM in order to preserve the claim period. The date the agency or OPM receives the claim is the date that determines the period of possible back pay entitlement.
Under 5 C.F.R. § 551.104, “willful violation” means a violation in circumstances where the agency knew that its conduct was prohibited by the Act or showed reckless disregard of the requirements of the Act. All of the facts and circumstances surrounding the violation are taken into account in determining whether a violation was willful.
A FLSA claim to HHS or to OPM must be in writing and submitted through the OHRO to HHS/OHR. The OHRO will forward the complete appeal package within 15 days of receipt. Failure to submit an appeal through the appropriate channels may result in a delay in the decision.
The following information shall be submitted by the employees:
A signed statement that the employee wishes to appeal the FLSA determination of his/her position;
Name of local facility;
Organization to which assigned;
Current position title, series, and grade;
The requested FLSA determination;
A description of the nature of the claim and the specific issues or incidents giving rise to the claim, including the time period covered by the claim;
Evidence available which supports the claim, including the identity, commercial telephone number, and location of other individuals who may be able to provide information relating to the claim;
A written designation of third party representation, if applicable. The designation must include the name, address and phone number of the representative.
Evidence, if available, that the claim period was preserved in accordance with the time limits in 5 C.F.R. § 551.702. The date HHS or OPM received the claim, whichever is earlier, becomes the date the claim period is preserved;
A statement as to whether the employee was or was not a member of a collective bargaining unit at any time during the claim period;
If the employee was a member of a bargaining unit, a statement that he/she was or was not covered by a negotiated grievance procedure at any time during the claim period, and if covered, whether that procedure specifically excluded the claim from the scope of the negotiated grievance procedure; and
A statement that the employee has not filed an action in an appropriate United States court.
The following information shall be submitted by the OHRO along with the material supplied by the appellant:
A current, accurate PD (agreed to by all levels of management) which meets standards of adequacy and which is consistent with the position evaluation report, FLSA evaluation report, and the supervisor's comments.
A position evaluation report which includes an in-depth comparison of the duties and responsibilities with published FLSA criteria. If the report was prepared prior to the appeal, it should be updated to cover salient points raised by the appellant that may not have been previously evaluated.
Organizational and functional charts.
Comments from the immediate supervisor and/or higher level official relative to the accuracy of the PD and the merits of the FLSA appeal. Discrepancies or disagreements should be resolved before submitting the appeal for decision.
Copies of official time and leave/pay records for the time period claimed.
OPM claims are forwarded to: Classification and Pay Claims Program Manager, Center for Merit System Accountability, Office of Personnel Management, 1900 E Street, NW, Room 6484, Washington, DC 20415.
HHS claims are forwarded to the HHS Director of the Talent Acquisition Division, in OHR, at employmentpolicy@hhs.gov.
511-1-140 Documentation and Accountability
Records associated with actions taken under this Instruction, including all documentation sufficient for third party reconstruction purposes, must be retained according to the record disposition schedule. All records created in a given year must be retained for a total of three full years. Records involved in litigation and grievance processes may be destroyed only after official notification is received from OPM, Department of Justice, courts, etc. or if the time limits associated with grievance processes have passed (e.g., before the anniversary date).
OHR will conduct periodic accountability reviews to analyze compliance with this Instruction, HHS and OPM policy and guidance and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Exhibit A: Example Position Description/Evaluation Statement Format
Example Position Description Format* (Factor Evaluation System)

[Position Title]
GS-[Occupational Series]-[Grade]

I. Introduction

[Describe the primary purpose of the position and its location within the organization. Include a very brief overview of the Duties and Responsibilities sections. If this position is a career ladder then the paragraph must identify its relative position (i.e. entry level, full performance, etc.).]

Example:  This position is located in [Office of the Secretary, an Operating Division, or Staff Division, of the Department of Health and Human Services]. The purpose of the position is to carry out a wide variety of assignments associated with administrative efficiency and operations of the office. The incumbent must have a current knowledge of administration and Department policy with respect to the various agency programs and activities. The work of the position focuses on responsibilities performed in support of the office or senior agency official and may involve a variety of sensitive and confidential matters. Responsibilities related to administrative matters include frequent contact with subordinate agencies throughout the Department. The incumbent serves as a principal member of the office’s support staff.

II. Major Duties and Responsibilities

[In descending order of importance, describe the principal duties and responsibilities which characterize the position in plain, clear language and as specifically as possible. Avoid general terms, vague expressions, repetition, and conclusions. Describe only the major duties, responsibilities and other important aspects of the position that may affect the final classification determination. Generally, major duties are those that occupy a significant portion of the employee's time and they should be only those duties currently assigned, observable, identified with the position's purpose and mission of the organization, and expected to continue on a regular and recurring basis.]

Performs other duties as assigned. [This exact statement must be included in all PDs.]

III. Factor 1 - Knowledge Required by the Position

[Describe:

Kind or nature of knowledge and skills needed.
How the knowledge and skills are used in doing the work.]
IV. Factor 2 - Supervisory Controls

[Describe:

How the work is assigned.
Employee's responsibility for carrying out the work.
How the work is reviewed. ]
V. Factor 3 – Guidelines

[Describe:

Guidelines used for performing the work.
Judgment needed to apply the guidelines or develop new guides. ]
VI. Factor 4 – Complexity

[Describe:

Nature of the assignment.
Difficulty in identifying what needs to be done.
Difficulty and originality involved in performing the work. ]
VII. Factor 5 - Scope and Effect        

[Describe:

Purpose of the work.
Impact of the work product or service (how far-reaching is its effects). ]
VIII. Factors 6/7 - Personal Contacts/Purpose of Contacts

[Describe:

People and conditions/setting under which contacts are made.
Reasons for contacts in Factor 6.]
IX. Factor 8 - Physical Demands

[Describe:

Nature, frequency, and intensity of physical activity.]
X. Factor 9 - Work Environment      

[Describe:

Risks and discomforts caused by physical surroundings and the safety precautions necessary to avoid accidents or discomfort.]
*The FES format must be used when the classification of the position is based on a FES standard.

 

Sample Evaluation Statement for FES Format

I. Introduction

[Briefly describe why the position is being established, re-evaluated, etc.]

II. References

[Include all references used to classify the position, for example:

Introduction to the Position Classification Standards, Revised: August 2009
The Classifier’s Handbook, August 1991
Administrative Work in the Human Resources Management Group, GS-0200 December 2000]
III. Pay Plan, Series, and Title Determination

[Describe how the pay plan, series, and title were determined, utilizing references from paragraph II above.]

IV. Grade Determination

[Refer to the standard used to evaluate the position and describe how the position FULLY meets the factor levels described in the Standard (i.e., if the factor level(s) require additional explanation, provide the rationale for assigning the factor level(s) that was credited.]

V. Conclusion

[State the classification determination, based on the above evaluation.]

 

Example Position Description (Narrative Format)

[Position Title]
GS-[Occupational Series]-[Grade]

I. Introduction

[Describe the primary purpose of the position and its location within the organization. Include a very brief overview of the Duties and Responsibilities sections. If this position is a career ladder then the paragraph must identify its relative position (i.e. entry level, full performance, etc.).]

Example:  This position is located in [Office of the Secretary, an Operating Division, or Staff Division] of the Department of Health and Human Services.  The purpose of the position is to carry out a wide variety of assignments associated with administrative efficiency and operations of the office. The incumbent must have a current knowledge of administration and Department policy with respect to the various agency programs and activities. The work of the position focuses on responsibilities performed in support of the office or senior agency official and may involve a variety of sensitive and confidential matters. Responsibilities related to administrative matters include frequent contact with subordinate agencies throughout the Department. The incumbent serves as a principal member of the office’s support staff.

II. Nature of Assignment

[In descending order of importance, describe the principal duties and responsibilities which characterize the position, describing them in plain, clear language and as specifically as possible. Avoid general terms, vague expressions, repetition, and conclusions. Describe only the major duties and other important aspects of the position that may affect the final classification determination. Generally, major duties are those that occupy a significant portion of the employee's time and they should be only those duties currently assigned, observable, identified with the position's purpose and mission of the organization, and expected to continue on a regular and recurring basis.]

Performs other duties as assigned. [This exact statement must be included on all PDs.]

III. Level of Responsibility    

[Describe:

Kind or nature of knowledge and skills needed.
How the knowledge and skills are used in doing the work.
Level of responsibility given in decision-making.
Guidelines used to perform the work.
How work is assigned.]
 

Example Evaluation Statement (Narrative Format)

I. Introduction

[Briefly describe why the position is being established, re-evaluated, etc.]

II. References

[Include all references used to classify the position, for example:

Introduction to the Position Classification Standards, Revised: August 2009
The Classifier’s Handbook, August 1991
Administrative Work in the Human Resources Management Group, GS-0200 December 2000
III. Pay Plan, Series, and Title Determination

[Describe how the pay plan, series, and title were determined, utilizing references from paragraph II above.]

IV. Grade Determination

[Refer to the standard used to evaluate the position and describe how the position FULLY meets the factor levels described in the Standard (i.e., if the factor level(s) require additional explanation, provide the rationale for assigning the factor level(s) that was credited.]

V. Conclusion

[State the classification determination, based on the above evaluation.]

Exhibit B: FLSA Status Determination Questionnaire for Managers and Supervisors
Fair Labor Standards Act Status Determination Questionnaire for Managers and Supervisors

Employee: [Joe Donuts]

Position Title: [       ] Pay Plan: [       ]    Series [0123]    Grade [09]    PD # [12345]

Office: [Office of Self Employment]

Employment Status: [Full-Time]           Work Schedule: [8 hour]

Supervisor: [       ]                        Contact Number: [123-456-7890]

Purpose: This questionnaire is for managers and supervisors to assist Classifiers in determining whether or not the named employee should be coded as exempt or non-exempt from the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA). The provisions of the FLSA apply to employees coded as non-exempt. The FLSA status of the employee is often the key to deciding whether certain duties are compensable as "hours of work" and as to the rate of pay the employee should be compensated. Overtime entitlements also depend on this status, as may compensation for travel time. It is assumed that all federal employees are covered by the FLSA (Non-Exempt) unless they clearly fall under one of the following exemptions. Job titles and official PDs do not determine an employee’s status, rather it is the duties that the employee actually performs on a regular and recurring basis that serve as the determining factor. Please provide detailed explanation in the spaces provided for all “Yes” answers.

Yes [   ] No [   ]

Is the employee a supervisor or manager? (regularly directs two or more employees, and has the authority to hire or fire (or the employee's recommendations as to the hiring, firing, advancement, promotion, or any other change of status of other employees, are given particular weight))?

If yes, list examples of duties to support this:
Yes [   ] No [   ]

Does the employee exercise discretion and independent judgment with respect to matters of significance while performing office or non-manual work directly related to the agency's management or general business operations? (The exercise of discretion and independent judgment involves the comparison and the evaluation of possible courses of conduct, and acting or making a decision after the various possibilities have been considered.  Employees who simply apply well-established techniques or procedures described in manuals or other sources within closely prescribed limits to determine the correct response to an inquiry or set of circumstances are nonexempt. The term “matters of significance” refers to the level of importance or consequence of the work performed. Some examples: Employee has authority to commit the employer in matters that have significant financial impact; has authority to waive or deviate from established policies and procedures without prior approval; has authority to negotiate and bind the organization on significant matters.)

If yes, list examples of duties to support this:
Yes  [   ] No [   ]

Does the employee's primary duties require advanced knowledge in a field of science or learning customarily acquired by a prolonged course of specialized instruction? The work must include the following three elements:
The employee must perform work requiring advanced knowledge (predominantly intellectual in character and including work requiring the consistent exercise of discretion and judgment). Advanced knowledge cannot be attained at the high school level;
The advanced knowledge must be in a field of science or learning which includes the traditional professions of law, medicine, theology, accounting, actuarial computation, engineering, architecture, teaching, various types of physical, chemical and biological sciences, pharmacy, and other similar occupations that have a recognized professional status;
The advanced knowledge must be customarily acquired by a prolonged course of specialized instruction in a field where specialized academic training is a standard prerequisite for entrance into the profession – to address this element, please identify specifically the type and level of specialized instruction required for the position.
If yes, list examples of duties to support this:
Yes [   ] No [   ]

Is the employee's primary duty in the performance of work requiring invention, imagination, originality, or talent in a recognized field of artistic or creative endeavor? The work performed must be "in a recognized field of artistic or creative endeavor," including such fields as music, writing, acting, and the graphic arts. Employees engaged in the work of newspapers, magazines, television, or other media are not exempt creative professionals if they only collect, organize, and record information that is routine or already public, or if they do not contribute a unique interpretation or analysis to a news product.

If yes, list examples of duties to support this:
Yes [   ] No [   ]

Is the employee a skilled worker in the computer field? The exemption for employees in computer occupations does not include employees engaged in the manufacture or repair of computer hardware and related equipment. Rather, the exemption applies to computer employees whose primary duties consist of:
 

The application of systems analysis techniques and procedures, including consulting with users, to determine hardware, software or system functional specifications;
The design, development, documentation, analysis, creation, testing or modification of computer systems or programs, including prototypes, based on and related to user or system design specifications;
The design, documentation, testing, creation or modification of computer programs related to machine operating systems;
A combination of the above, requiring the same level of skills.
If yes, list examples of duties to support this:
Supervisor’s Signature ______________________ Date:

Exhibit C: HHS Fair Labor Standards Act Classifier Checklist
HHS FLSA Classifier Checklist

Complete this form for each grade in a career ladder. Note: it is possible for different grades within a career ladder to have different FLSA designations (for example, non-exempt at lower grades; or the work is procedural in nature; and exempt at higher grades in the career ladder requiring more analytical skills to complete the tasks). A completed and signed checklist must be attached to each classified position description and statement of difference (if applicable).

Instructions: Complete the fields below and check the criteria applicable to the position:

A.  REQUIRED POSITION INFORMATION

Position Title:                                     Pay Plan:  Series: 0123 Grade: 01

Position Number:              Office/Organization:      

Administrative Code:       Job Code:      

B.  NON-EXEMPT CRITERIA

Salary-based non-exemption (5 C.F.R. 551.203)

[   ] Employee annual rate of basic pay is less than $23,660.
Non-exemption of certain employees (5 C.F.R. 551.204)

[   ] Position is non-supervisory and engaged in equipment operation, or is a protective or clerical occupation.

[   ] Position involves technician work properly classified at the GS-09 level or below.

[   ] Position is nonsupervisory in the Federal Wage System or other comparable wage system.
C.  EXEMPTION CRITERIA

Executive Exemption Criteria (5 C.F.R. 551.205)

[   ] Primary duty of the position is management or supervision; work involves customarily and regularly directing the work of subordinates and has the authority to hire, remove, or evaluate performance as well as make recommendations on employment issues that are given particular weight by higher-level supervisors or managers.
Administrative Exemption Criteria (5 C.F.R. 551.206)

[   ] Primary duty is performance of office or non-manual work directly related to the management or general business functions. The work involves the exercise of discretion and independent judgment with respect to matters of significance.
Professional Exemption Criteria (5 C.F.R. 551.207)

[   ] Learned Professionals (5 C.F.R. 551.208): Primary duty is performance of work requiring advanced knowledge in a field of science or learning including the traditional professions of law, medicine, theology, accounting, actuarial computation, engineering, architecture, teaching, pharmacy, various types of physical, chemical and biological sciences, and other similar occupations that have a recognized professional status; entrance into these professions requires a prolonged course of specialized intellectual instruction.

[   ] Creative Professionals (5 C.F.R. 551.209): Primary duty is performance of work requiring invention, imagination, originality or talent in a recognized field of artistic or creative endeavor such as music, acting, writing, and the graphic arts. Exemption depends upon the extent of invention, imagination, originality or talent of the employee; exemption does not apply to work that can be produced by a person with general manual or intellectual ability and training.

[   ] Computer Employees (5 C.F.R. 551.210): Primary duty consists of the application of systems analysis techniques and procedures, including consulting with users to determine hardware, software or system functions specifications; OR design development, documentation, analysis, creation, testing or modification of computer systems or programs; OR a combination of these duties. Exemption does not apply to employees engaged in the manufacture or repair of computer hardware and related equipment or to those whose work is highly reliant on computers but whose duties do not consist of the aforementioned. Salary based exemption applies to any computer professional compensated on an hourly bases at a rate of basic pay of $27.63 an hour and above.
Temporary Duties (5 C.F.R. 551.211):

[   ] Performing different work or duties for a temporary period of time may affect an employee's exemption status. Consult 5 C.F.R. 551.211 for more details and explain in remarks below.
Foreign Exemption Criteria (5 C.F.R. 551.212)

[   ] Employees permanently stationed in an exempt area and spend all hours of work in a given work week in one or more exempt areas or employees not permanently stationed in an exempt area, but spend all hours of work in a given work week in one or more exempt areas. Exempt area means any foreign country, or any territory under the jurisdiction of the United States other than a State; the District of Columbia; Puerto Rico; the U.S. Virgin Islands; American Samoa; Guam; Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands; Midway Atoll; Wake Island; Johnston Island; and Palmyra (5 C.F.R.104).
Criminal Investigators Receiving Availability Pay (5 C.F.R. 551.213(a))

[   ] Special exemption/exclusion applies to criminal investigators receiving availability pay.
Law Enforcement Activities (5 C.F.R. 551.216)

[   ] Certain duties performed by law enforcement officers affect FLSA status.  Consult 5 CFR 551.216 for more details and explain in remarks below.
Final Determination (check one):     [   ] Non-Exempt                      [   ] Exempt

HR Specialist:                                      Date:

Signature __________________________________________

Remarks:








511-2
Material Transmitted:

Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 511-2, Use of Career Ladder Positions, dated December 15, 2008.

Background:

This instruction provides the following: 

1.	Guidance to OPDIVs on criteria for establishing career ladder positions, including factors to consider and required documentation.

2.	Provides prohibitive policy for the use of career ladder positions to the GS-14 and GS-15 level and process for exceptions.

This issuance is effective immediately. Implementation under this issuance must be carried out in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, bargaining agreements, and Departmental policy.




						Antonia T. Harris
						Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources
						




INSTRUCTION 511-2
 
SUBJECT:	USE OF CAREER LADDER POSITIONS

511-2-00	Purpose
511-2-10	References
511-2-20	Definitions
511-2-30	Establishing Career Ladder Positions
511-2-40	Use of Career Ladder Positions to GS-14 and GS-15 Levels 

511-2-00     	PURPOSE
This document outlines the proper and improper uses of career ladder positions in the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS).  It also provides prohibitive policy for the use of career ladder positions to the GS-14 and GS-15 level. 
Where this policy conflicts with existing negotiated agreements, including applicable Merit Promotion Plans, the agreement takes precedence over this Instruction for covered employees.
511-2-10	REFERENCES	

A.	5 CFR Part 335 (Promotion and Internal Placement)

B.	5 CFR Part 511 (Classification under the General Schedule)

C.	HHS Instruction 511-1 (Position Classification,  May 2008)

511-2-20	DEFINITIONS

A.	Career Ladder Position.  A position restructured to allow for entry at a lower grade level than the full performance grade level which allows for progression to the full performance level. Normally, a position is announced and filled on a competitive basis with promotion to higher grade levels made on a non-competitive basis. The career ladder refers to the range of grades to which the employee may be promoted non-competitively up to the classified full-performance level of the position.  For example, a Human Resources Specialist, GS-201 position is classified at the full performance level of a GS-12.  Since this is a two-grade interval series, the career ladder position could be established at the GS-5, GS-7, GS-9, or GS-11, leading to the full performance GS-12.  If the position is announced as a GS-7 target GS-12, the incumbent may be non-competitively promoted from the GS-7, to the GS-9, to the GS-11, then to the GS-12.  

B.	Non-competitive Promotion.  After having entered a career ladder, an employee may advance in grade up to the full performance level without further competition, i.e. the employee does not have to recompete for each subsequent promotion and the agency does not have to reannounce the position in order to promote the incumbent. 
511-2-30	ESTABLISHING CAREER LADDERS    
A.	Establishing career ladder positions can optimize efficiency, productivity and organizational effectiveness by broadening the pool of applicants when filling vacant positions; enhancing employee motivation and job satisfaction through planned employee development; reducing time to process promotions and administrative costs by providing non-competitive advancement within the career ladder; enhancing workforce retention by providing internal career opportunities; and lowering average human capital costs by including a range of pay levels. 
B.	OPDIVs must consider the following factors when deciding to establish a career ladder for a position: 
1.	Size of Applicant pool.  Career ladders are a useful tool when recruitment for the position is difficult at higher grade levels.  Recruiting at lower grade levels can broaden the applicant pool.  
2.	Availability of Training Staff.  Career ladders should only be established when there is available senior staff with the breadth and scope of technical knowledge necessary to train the incumbent.  
3.	Uniqueness of Duties.  If a position requires unique, specialized qualifications where there is no staff available or knowledgeable to train or develop the incumbent, a career ladder will not be established.  
4.	Risk Management.  For a position where anything less than full performance would put the Department at risk, a career ladder will not be established.  
5.	Supervisory Status.  Career ladders should not be established for supervisory positions.  
6.	Grade Level.  Positions graded above the GS-13 level will not be established as career ladders.  Rare exceptions may be made to this rule with justification and prior approval (see Section 511-2-40)
C.	Documentation.  All requests to establish and fill career ladder positions at any grade level must include the appropriate documentation, to include:
1.	A signed OF-8 from the manager with authority over the position;
2.	A Position Description (PD) or Statement of Differences for each intervening level in the career ladder that refers to the full performance PD.
3.	Appropriate job analysis relevant to each of the grade levels. Job requirements for trainee grade levels are normally not the same as for full performance grade levels.
4.	Appropriate criteria (e.g. questions from the automated recruitment system question library) that aligns with the job analysis.
D.	If a career ladder position is established and filled, supervisors/managers should: 
1.	Provide employees increasingly difficult assignments and training to prepare them for the next higher grade. 
2.	Monitor training progress continuously to enable subsequent promotions in a timely manner.
3.	Clearly communicate to applicants the normal expected span of time between subsequent promotions, especially if that time frame exceeds one year between grade levels.
4.	Ensure funding plans accommodate subsequent promotions of employees selected below the full performance level. 
5.	Promote employees who demonstrate the ability to successfully perform the next higher level duties and responsibilities in the career ladder in accordance with the specific training agreement or collective bargaining agreements. 
6.	Provide remedial assistance to employees who are not ready for promotion to enhance their performance and future success. 
511-2-40	USE OF CAREER LADDER POSITIONS TO GS-14 AND GS-15 LEVELS 

A.	It is generally prohibited for Operating Divisions (OPDIVs) to establish and fill career ladder positions at any grade level  with promotion potential to the GS-14 and GS-15 levels, except with approval from the Director, of the operating Human Resources organization which provides Human Resource services to that OPDIV. (See Section D).  

B.	Positions at the GS-14 and GS-15 level require a unique combination of technical, managerial, and leadership skills. It is difficult to accurately predict success of any individual for the full performance GS-14 or GS-15 grade level who has not yet performed at the next lower grade for the target position.

C.	Establishing grade levels of high graded positions require considerable justification.  Organizations able to employ a lower graded employee in a higher graded position billet are less likely to be able to support that requirement.

D.	Exceptions.   

1.	Prior to the classification of any career ladder to the GS-14 or GS-15 level, written justification and approval must be obtained from the Director of the operating  Human Resources organization with classification authority for the OPDIV as stated in HHS Instruction 511-1, Position Classification. 
2.	A career ladder is established based upon a classification analysis that sufficient work exists for all employees on a regular and recurring basis at the full performance level to support the grade.
3.	Any OPDIV request to the HR Director for an exception to establish such a career ladder to the GS-14 or GS-15 level must contain justification based upon the following criteria: 

a.	Filling a  mission critical need;
b.	Recruitment and retention needs based upon external market factors; and
c.	Geographic location considerations.
4.	Any request from an OPDIV to the HR Director for a career ladder to the GS-14 and GS-15 levels must include the following documentation:

a.	The proposed full performance PD;
b.	Statement of Difference for each grade level in the career ladder;
c.	A copy of an OF-8 PD Cover Sheet signed by the manager who has direct authority over the proposed career ladder position;
d.	A copy of the classification Evaluation Statement that analyzes and documents that the proposed PDs meet Office of Personnel Management classification standards and guides;
e.	Justification signed by the OPDIV Head that clearly expresses the reason for this exception.




















511-3
Background:

This instruction provides guidance to Human Resources Offices and Operating and Staff Divisions on criteria for effecting a non-competitive promotion based upon reclassification or gradual accretion of duties.
This issuance is effective immediately.  Implementation under this issuance must be carried out in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, merit promotion plans, union agreements, and Departmental policy.




						Denise L. Carter
						Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human 
						   Resources

INSTRUCTION 511-3
 

HHS PERSONNEL INSTRUCTION 511-3
Non-Competitive Promotion Based Upon Reclassification (Accretion of Duties)

511-3-00	Purpose
511-3-10	References
511-3-20	Policy 
511-3-30	Procedures
511-3-40	Processing and Retention of Documentation

511-3-00     	PURPOSE

The purpose of this Instruction is to present guidance and operational policy regarding the use of non-competitive promotion that is based upon the addition of new duties and responsibilities (accretion of duties) to a position in the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS).

511-3-10	REFERENCES	

A. 5 CFR 335.103(c) (3) (ii), Promotion and Internal Placement

B. 5 CFR 511, Subpart F- Classification Appeals

	C.  Office of Personnel Management (OPM) Position Classification Standards, Introduction to the Standards and the Classifier’s Handbook

	D.  OPM Research Grade Evaluation Guide, September 2006

	E.  HHS Instruction 511-1- Position Classification, May 2008

	F.  Operating Division (OPDIV) Merit Promotion Plans (MPPs)

511-3-20    	 POLICY

A.  It is the policy of HHS to maximize the use of the merit promotion process and encourage free and open competition by posting all vacancies. HHS strongly believes that this strengthens the adherence to Merit System Principles required by law and regulation. Frequent use of exceptions to this undermines and weakens these Merit System Principles. HHS recognizes that a permanent non-competitive promotion to a reclassified position may be processed as an exception to merit promotion procedures.  Examples include the application of new OPM classification standards, correction of a previous classification error, and the re-promotion of an employee who had previously competed for a higher grade position.



B.  Multi-Allocated Positions:  Competitive Merit Promotion procedures will apply in those instances where the employee is encumbering a multi-allocated position description (PD), in which two or more employees occupy the same PD in the same immediate organization unit.

C.  It is the policy of HHS to utilize hiring and other personnel flexibilities to attract and retain a highly competent and motivated workforce.  Reassignments must comply with personnel regulations and collective bargaining agreements, as appropriate. These reassignments are usually done to positions at the same grade level and do not involve permanent promotions to grades an employee had not previously held. 

D.  It is the policy of HHS to strongly encourage Human Resources Offices (HROs) to communicate with OPDIV managers who seek a non-competitive promotion based upon a reclassification of new and additional duties and responsibilities.  Such cases must be well documented to describe the new duties and responsibilities, changes in reporting relationships, and other classification factors.  

E.  Human Resource Specialists (HRSs) will ensure that all requests for non-competitive promotions are fully documented and meet all the requirements for an exception to the merit promotion process.  This includes a new PD that adequately describes the additional duties and responsibilities assigned to the employee; a PD Cover Optional Form (OF) 8, signed and dated by the manager with authority over the position, and all justification documents that support the manager’s assertion that an “accretion of duties” non-competitive promotion is warranted.

F. It is the policy of HHS to ensure employees are not limited from invoking their statutory classification appeal rights to either HHS, under HHS Instruction 511-1, or to OPM, under CFR 511, Subpart F.

511-3-30     PROCEDURES

A.  In order to determine whether or not an employee meets the requirement for an accretion of duties promotion, the HRS must receive the following documents from the first line supervisor and address the following questions:

	       Documents that are to be submitted:

1.  Request for Personnel Action (SF-52) or electronic equivalent

2.  Justification for Promotion Based on Reclassification (Accretion of Duties) 

3.  A new draft PD, which includes the additional duties and responsibilities.



4.  A PD Cover Sheet OF-8 that is signed and dated by the manager with the authority over the position

Questions to be answered:

1.  What additional duties and responsibilities were added to the position?

2.  Who if anyone performed these duties prior to the incumbent?

3.  How did it come about that this incumbent began performing the additional duties?

4.  How long have these new duties been assigned to the incumbent?

5.  Why were these duties not assigned to an existing higher graded position or assigned to an existing or new position?
         
B.  The HRS will review the information provided along with the official personnel folder, and pertinent OPM classification standards and regulations to determine if the request meets the regulatory requirements of a promotion based on reclassification.  The HRS will determine if the employee meets the eligibility and qualification requirements for the reclassified position.  

C.  The HRS may choose to conduct a separate fact-finding interview (desk audit) with the manager or supervisor and the employee to ensure that the questions identified in section 511-3-30C have been thoroughly answered.

D.  The HRS will prepare a written Report of Findings (RoF) and present it to the manager, summarizing the conclusion(s) to concur or non-concur with the exception to merit promotion based upon reclassification.  The RoF will contain the classification rationale that justifies the decision.

The HRS will inform the manager that an accretion of duties promotion is not automatic.  There are other options including:  reassigning the higher grade duties to another employee; having the duties performed in another work unit; or submitting a competitive promotion in accordance with the OPDIV’s MPP.

E.  HHS OPDIVs and their HRO’s that utilize a non-competitive promotion process based upon the OPM Impact of the Person concept must develop a written procedure that defines that process.  In addition, all OPDIV Impact of the Person processes must be in compliance with the OPM Research Grade Evaluation Guide, issued in September 2006.  

F. Prior to granting a promotion based upon this Instruction, concurrence from a management official within the HHS HR servicing organization must be obtained. 

OPDIVs are encouraged to establish procedures to support the implementation of this policy within their respective Agency functional areas.

G.  The following conditions must be met before a promotion based upon reclassification is considered.

•	The major duties and basic functions of the current position must be absorbed into the new position.
•	The new position must be in the same series and pay system as the former position.
•	A one grade interval position may not be changed to a two grade interval position.
•	The current position must be abolished.
•	The new position must not have any known promotion potential beyond its current grade.
•	The new position cannot reduce the known promotion potential of another position or adversely impact another occupied position.
•	The position cannot be upgraded because of the addition of supervisory or team leader duties to a non-supervisory or non-team leader position.

H.  In the event the HRS RoF does not support the request for a non-competitive promotion based upon reclassification, the manager with the authority over such a position may submit additional rationale and/or justification to the HRS for reconsideration.  The final decision to concur or non-concur with such a request rests with the HRO Director. 

 511-3-40     PROCESSING AND RETENTION OF DOCUMENTATION

A.  If the HRS RoF concurs with the request for a non-competitive promotion based upon reclassification, the personnel action will be processed in the Capital HR system. 

B.  If the HRS RoF does not concur with the request for a non-competitive promotion based upon reclassification, the revised PD, standard or non-standard, may be utilized as the official PD of record for that employee at their current series and grade. 

C.  All position related documentation will be retained and attached to the revised PD in the organization’s PD Book or electronic PD Library for as long as the PD remains active in the organization.
.










351-1
HHS Instruction 351-1: Reduction in Force (RIF)
Effective Date: 12/22/2020

Material Transmitted:
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 351-1, Reduction in Force, dated December 22, 2020.

Material Superseded:
HHS Instruction 351-1, Reduction in Force, dated January 29, 2009.
HHS Instruction 351-2, Position Competitive Level Codes, dated December 23, 2013.

Background:
This Instruction is established to reflect changes in law, regulations, and the Department of Health and Human Service (HHS) and the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) requirements concerning Reduction in Force (RIF) procedures.

This policy is effective immediately and must be carried out by HHS Operating and Staff Division HR Centers in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, bargaining agreements, and Departmental policy.

/s/

J. Blair Duncan
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources
Chief Human Capital Officer

Subject: Reduction in Force
351-1-00 Purpose
351-1-10 Coverage and Exclusions
351-1-20 References
351-1-30 Definitions
351-1-40 Roles and Responsibilities
351-1-50 General Workforce Restructuring
351-1-60 RIF Planning – Filling Vacancies
351-1-70 RIF Planning – Competitive Areas
351-1-80 RIF Planning – Competitive Levels
351-1-90 RIF Planning – Other Required Actions
351-1-100 RIF Procedures
351-1-110 Specific RIF Notices
351-1-120 Priority Placement Assistance
351-1-130 Appeals and Corrective Actions
351-1-140 Documentation and Accountability

Appendix: HHS Competitive Level Codes

315-1-00 Purpose
This Instruction implements the Department of Health and Human Services (Department or HHS) policy, responsibilities, and procedures on Reduction in Force (RIF).  Separating or downgrading employee(s) due to reorganization, lack of work, shortage of funds, insufficient personnel ceiling, or the exercise of certain reemployment or restoration rights are RIF actions.  A furlough of more than 30 calendar days (or more than 22 discontinuous work days) but not more than 1 year; and a reclassification of an employee’s position due to erosion of duties when the classification action will take effect after a RIF has been formally announced in the employee’s competitive area and when the RIF will take effect within 180 days are also RIF actions.  HHS Operating and Staff Divisions (OpDiv/StaffDiv, or Division) must use RIF as a method of last resort and ensure that all available workforce restructuring options are utilized first to minimize or avoid the adverse impact of RIF on employees.

When provisions of this policy differ from changes in applicable law or regulation, the changes in law or regulation apply.

315-1-10 Coverage and Exclusions
Coverage.
The provisions of this Instruction apply to all HHS employees in competitive and excepted service positions.

Exclusions. This Instruction does not apply to:
Members of the Senior Executive Service (SES);
An employee whose appointment is required by Congress to be confirmed by, or made with the advice and consent of, the Senate;
U.S. Public Health Service (PHS) Commissioned Corps Officers;
A reemployed annuitant, unless the appointing officer determines that an annuitant may compete under the RIF regulations (an annuitant serves at the will of the agency and may be separated at any time at the discretion of the appointing officer; however, if the agency does not separate the annuitant prior to a RIF, the agency determines the annuitant’s retention standing on the basis of the employee's actual appointment and the annuitant competes in the RIF in the same manner as other competing employees); and
The actions excluded in 5 CFR §351.202(c).
351-1-20 References
Public Law (P.L.) 78-359, Section 12, the Veteran Preference Act of 1944, as amended
5 U.S.C. §§3501-3504 , Retention Preference 5 USC 3501-3504
5 U.S.C. Subchapter VI , Grade and Pay Retention
25 U.S.C. §5117 , Indian Preference Laws Applicable to Indian Health Service Positions
5 CFR Part 330, Subpart B, Reemployment Priority List (RPL)
5 CFR Part 330, Subpart F, Agency Career Transition Assistance Plan (CTAP) for Local Surplus and Displaced Employees
5 CFR Part 330, Subpart G, Interagency Career Transition Assistance Plan (ICTAP) for Displaced Employees
5 CFR §§302.303 and 304, Employment in the Excepted Service (PRL)
5 CFR Part 351, Reduction in Force
5 CFR Part 536, Grade and Pay Retention
5 CFR 550, Subpart G, Severance Pay
5 CFR §930.210, Administrative Law Judge Program, Reduction in Force
HHS Instruction 430-1, Performance Management Appraisal Program (PMAP)
HHS Instruction 330-2, Priority Placement Programs
HHS Memorandum, Delegation of Human Resources Authorities, dated October 15, 2019
OPM Title 38 Delegation to HHS, effective through June 30, 2022
OPM VetGuide
OPM Workforce Reshaping Operations Handbook - PDF
351-1-30 Definitions
Adjusted Service Computation Date.  An employee's service computation date plus credit for her/his three most recent annual performance ratings of record (5 CFR §351.503).  The adjusted SCD is only used for RIF purposes.
Agency.  For the purposes of this Instruction, an agency is defined as an HHS OpDiv/StaffDiv with human resources (HR) authority, unless otherwise noted.
Assignment rights (Bump and Retreat).  An employee's entitlement to displace another employee with lower retention standing. In accordance with 5 CFR §351.705, HHS excepted service employees are provided assignment rights to other excepted positions under the same appointment authority.
Available Position.  As defined in 5 CFR §351.701(a), an available position that satisfies an employee’s RIF assignment right must meet all the following criteria:
Be in the competitive service;
Be in the same competitive area as the position the individual currently occupies;
Last at least 3 months;
Be a position for which the released employee qualifies, unless the OpDiv/StaffDiv, at its discretion, chooses to waive qualifications in offering the employee assignment to a vacant position;
Have a representative rate that is equal to or less than the position held by the released employee;
Be occupied by a lower-standing employee in a different competitive level who can be displaced by the released employee by bumping rights, or by retreating rights; and
Have the same type of work schedule (full-time, part-time, intermittent, seasonal, or on-call) as the position from which the higher-standing employee is released.
Career Transition Assistance Plan (CTAP) as defined in 5 CFR Part 330, Subpart F and HHS Instruction 330-2, Priority Placement Programs, provides eligible surplus and displaced HHS employees selection priority for HHS competitive service vacancies for which there are active recruitment actions.
Competing Employee.  An employee in tenure group I, II, or III, in either the competitive or excepted service (5 CFR §351.203).
Competitive Area.  The geographic and organizational boundaries within which employees compete in a RIF (5 CFR §351.402).  Competitive areas are determined by the OpDiv/StaffDiv’s Human Resource Director, with approval by the OpDiv/StaffDiv Head.
Competitive Level.  A group of positions with the same grade and occupational series, and similar duties, qualifications requirements, and working conditions.  Separate competitive levels are established for competitive and excepted service positions; excepted service appointing authorities; and for positions in different pay schedules, work schedules, and trainee status (5 CFR §351.403). The OpDiv/StaffDiv must establish separate competitive levels for positions in the competitive service, and for positions in the excepted service.  Employees who hold excepted service appointments in competitive service positions (e.g., Veterans Recruitment Appointments (VRA)) compete for retention in the excepted service, but do not compete for retention with employees who hold the same positions under competitive service appointments.
Competitive Service.  All civil service positions in the executive branch, except (1) positions which are specifically excepted from the competitive service by or under statute; (2) positions to which appointments are made by nomination for confirmation by the Senate, unless the Senate otherwise directs; and (3) positions in the Senior Executive Service (5 CFR §212.101).
Days.  Calendar days (5 CFR §351.203).
Excepted Service.  Civil service positions that are not in the competitive service or the Senior Executive Service (5 CFR §213.101).
Function.  All, or a clearly identifiable segment, of an agency’s mission (including all integral parts of that mission), regardless of how it is performed (5 CFR §351.203).
Furlough Under RIF Procedures.  The placement of an employee in a temporary nonduty and nonpay status for more than 30 consecutive calendar days, or more than 22 discontinuous workdays, but not more than 1 year (5 CFR §351.203).
Interagency Career Transition Assistance Plan (ICTAP) as defined in 5 CFR Part 330, Subpart G and HHS Instruction 330-2, Priority Placement Programs, provides eligible displaced HHS employees selection priority for competitive service vacancies at other Federal agencies, and provides eligible displaced employees of other Federal agencies selection priority for HHS competitive service vacancies for which there are active recruitment actions.
Local Commuting Area.  The geographic area that usually constitutes one area for employment purposes; any population center (or two or more neighboring ones) and surrounding localities in which employees live and can be reasonably expected to travel back and forth daily to their place of employment (5 CFR §351.203).  There is no mileage standard.
Modal Rating.  OPM has determined that an employee who has no rating of record during the 4-year period will receive the modal rating, i.e., the summary rating level assigned most frequently within the competitive area and on record for the most recently completed appraisal period prior to the cutoff date specified (5 CFR §§351.203 and 504(c)(1)).  However, in most instances, every employee in the competitive area should have at least one (1) rating of record during the last four (4) years.  If at least one rating exists, a modal rating is not required.
Priority Reemployment List (PRL) as defined in 5 CFR Part 302.303 and HHS Instruction 330-2, Priority Placement Programs, the mechanism used to give reemployment consideration and placement assistance to former HHS excepted service employees who have been furloughed or separated by RIF; have fully recovered from compensable injury after one (1) year; or received a Merit Systems Protection Board decision based on an appeal of an adverse action.
Rating of Record.  The performance rating prepared at the end of an appraisal period for the performance of assigned duties over the entire period, and the assignment of a summary level rating (5 CFR §§351.203 and 430.203).
Reemployment Priority List (RPL) as defined in 5 CFR Part 330 Subpart B and HHS Instruction 330-2, Priority Placement Programs, the mechanism used to give reemployment consideration and placement assistance to current and former HHS competitive service employees who have or will be separated by RIF, or have fully recovered from a compensable injury after one (1) year.
Representative Rate.  The fourth step of the grade for GS positions and the second step of the grade for WG/WL/WS positions. This is further defined under 5 CFR §351.203.
Reorganization.  The planned elimination, addition, or redistribution of functions or duties in an organization (5 CFR §351.203).
Retention Factors.  Tenure, veteran preference, performance ratings, and length of service. (5 CFR §§351.501 and 502).
Retention Register.  The ranking of employees in a competitive level after the following four (4) retention factors are applied: tenure of employment (i.e., type of appointment); veteran preference; performance ratings; and total creditable federal civilian and uniformed service (5 CFR §351.404).
Retention Standing.  The order that employees appear on a retention register based on their tenure of employment, veteran preference, performance ratings; and total creditable federal civilian and uniformed service, in descending (i.e., highest to lowest) order (5 CFR Part 351, Subpart E).
RIF Appeal.  An employee who believes her/his assignment rights were violated, or that the RIF process outlined in 5 CFR Part 351 was not correctly followed, may file a formal complaint with the Merit Systems Protection Board (5 CFR §351.901).
Tenure and Tenure Groups.  An employee's status based on length of service and type of appointment.  Tenure groups are defined under 5 CFR §§351.501(b) and 502(b).
Trainee Status.  When establishing competitive levels, employees in formally designated trainee or development programs that have all the characteristics listed in 5 CFR §351.703(e), e.g., Pathways Programs, SES Candidate Development Program, Emerging Leaders Program, are placed in a separate competitive level than employees not in trainee or development programs.
Transfer of Function.  The transfer of a function from one competitive area to one or more other competitive areas that does/do not perform the function at the time of transfer; or the movement of the competitive area in which the function is performed to another commuting area (5 CFR §351.203, and further explained in Subpart C).
Undue Disruption.  A degree of interruption that would prevent the completion of required work by the employee 90 days (while taking into consideration allowable limits of time, quality, and other demands) after the employee has been placed in a different position under this Instruction. The 90 day standard should be considered within the allowable limits of time and quality, taking into account the pressures of priorities, deadlines, and other demands.  However, a work program would generally not be unduly interrupted even if an employee needed more than 90 days after the RIF to perform the optimal quality or quantity of work.  The 90-day standard may be extended if placement is made in first or second-round RIF competition to a low-priority program, or to a vacant position (5 CFR §351.203).
351-1-40 Responsibilities
HHS Assistant Secretary for Administration, Office of Human Resources (ASA/OHR):
Develops Department-wide policy and guidance regarding RIF in accordance with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Reviews and submits requests to OPM for approval of Voluntary Early Retirement Authority (VERA) and/or Voluntary Separation Incentive Payments (VSIP) to minimize the impact of a downsizing and/or reshaping.
Notifies OPM in writing of any RIF involving 50 or more employees within a competitive area at the same time specific notices of separation are issued to employees by the OpDiv/StaffDiv(s).
Submits requests to OPM for approval to establish or change a competitive area within 90 days of the effective date of a RIF.
Submits requests to the Director of OPM to provide employees a specific RIF notice of less than 60 days, but at least 30 days, before the effective date of release when a RIF is caused by unforeseeable situation, e.g., a natural disaster.
Requests final determination from OPM that a 30% compensably disabled preference eligible employee selected for release from a competitive level is unable to perform the physical requirements of a position to which the employee would have otherwise been assigned.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Heads with HR Authority:
Comply with this Instruction; applicable HHS, OPM, and Office of Management and Budget (OMB) supplemental guidance; and federal laws and regulations.
Assess workforce requirements, based on mission and budget, to determine if a RIF is necessary, what functions/position(s) will be abolished, what positions will remain, and when a RIF will take place.
Notify ASA/OHR in advance of workforce restructuring measures, including a reorganization, transfer of function, RIF, or furlough covered by this Instruction.  (Depending on the scope of the proposed action(s), the ASA will notify the Secretary and/or OPM.)
Submit requests to ASA/OHR for OPM approval of VERA and/or VSIP authority.
In consultation with their Human Resources Center (HR Center), may modify or waive qualification requirements if s/he elects to reassign employees to vacant positions to avoid a RIF, or in lieu of furloughing or separating an employee, if the employee has the capacity, adaptability, and skills needs to perform the duties of the vacant position and meets the minimum education requirements for the position (5 CFR §351.703).  This responsibility may not be redelegated below the Human Resources Director.
Ensure the development of RIF plans and procedures within their Division, including a RIF communications plan for disseminating information and communicating with unions, leadership, employees and other stakeholders on a regular basis.
Before a RIF is announced, approve the competitive areas and competitive levels within their Division.
Submit requests to ASA/OHR for OPM approval to establish a competitive area within 90 days prior to the effective date of a RIF.
Submit requests to ASA/OHR for OPM approval to provide employees a specific RIF notice of less than 60 calendar days, but at least 30 calendar days, before the effective date of release when RIF is caused by an unforeseeable situation.
In consultation with their HR Center, may elect to make exceptions to the order of release in accordance with 5 CFR §§351.607 and 608.  This responsibility may not be redelegated below the Human Resources Director.
Ensure existing labor agreements are reviewed and comply with bargaining obligations.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Human Resource Directors:
Oversee the development and implementation of an internal RIF plan and ensure RIF plans, procedures, and practices comply with this Instruction; applicable HHS, OPM, and Office of Management and Budget (OMB) supplemental guidance and policy; collective bargaining agreements, and federal laws and regulations.
Determine and establish competitive areas and competitive levels, with approval of the OpDiv/StaffDiv Head.
Ensure notification periods in applicable collective bargaining agreements are negotiated with union representatives.
Protect the mutual interests of the Department and the rights of the employees when engaging in RIF activities.
Prepare requests to ASA/OHR for OPM approval of VERA and/or VSIP authority.
Prepare notifications to ASA/OHR when 50 or more employees in a competitive area will receive separation notices, in accordance with 5 CFR §351.803 and this Instruction.
Prepare requests to ASA/OHR for OPM approval to establish a competitive area within 90 days prior to the effective date of a RIF.
Prepare requests to ASA/OHR for OPM approval to provide employees a specific RIF notice of less than 60 days, but at least 30 days, before the effective date of release when a RIF is caused by an unforeseeable situation, in accordance with 5 CFR §351.801(b).
Submit requests to ASA/OHR for final OPM determination that a 30% compensably disabled preference eligible employee is unable to perform the physical requirements of a position to which the employee would have otherwise been assigned; and upon notice from OHR that the request has been sent to OPM, notifies the employee in writing of the reasons of the decision within 15 days of the request and before any other employee is selected for the position, in accordance with 5 CFR §351.702(d).
Ensure employee personnel records are accurate and that employees impacted by RIF are provided the opportunity to review their records and retention registers that affect them.
Develop a RIF communication plan for disseminating information, and communicating with employees, unions, and other stakeholders on a regular basis.
Ensure employees are advised of available priority placement programs and career transition services, as outlined in HHS Instruction 330-2, Priority Placement Programs, as soon as it is known that a RIF is likely, or at minimum, at least 60 full days before the effective date of release (or shorter notice period, if an exception is approved by OPM).
Ensure maintenance of records necessary to preserve rights and benefits granted by federal laws and regulations.
Prepare reports on RIF and any other reorganization actions authorized under this Instruction for submission to ASA/OHR and/or OPM, as required.
351-1-50 General Workforce Restructuring
Prior to announcing an action that will separate or downgrade employees, OpDiv/StaffDivs Heads should consider the following workforce restructuring actions which may help avoid or minimize actions that will adversely impact employees. (Reminder:  ASA/OHR must be notified of such proposed workforce restructuring efforts before they are implemented.)  For additional alternatives and information, see OPM’s - PDFWorkforce Reshaping Operations Handbook - PDF.
Reorganizations include the internal movement of resources, functions, and people, that occur without an adverse impact to employees, i.e., without loss of pay or benefits.
Hiring Freezes cease all hiring activities or use only internal placements to fill vacancies, with or without exceptions to fill positions from outside sources for certain mission critical occupations. Typically, hiring freezes reduce the workforce through attrition.
Separate Temporary Employees who are not eligible to compete in a RIF (i.e., those not identified as competing employees under 5 CFR §§351.501(b)(3) and 502(b)(3)) and/or reemployed annuitants. Temporary employees and reemployed annuitants serve at the will of the agency, and can be terminated without regard to RIF regulations.
Separate Senior Biomedical Research and Biomedical Product Assessment Service (SBRBPAS) Employees in accordance with HHS Instruction 42-3, SBRBPAS.
Furlough.  An administrative furlough is a planned event by an agency which is designed to absorb reductions necessitated by downsizing, reduced funding, lack of work, or any budget situation other than a lapse in appropriations. Additional information can be found in OPM’s Guidance for Administrative Furloughs - PDF.
Voluntary Early Retirement Authority (VERA) and/or Voluntary Separation Incentive Program (VSIP).  VERA temporarily lowers the age and service requirements in order to increase the number of employees who can retire during periods of substantial restructuring, reshaping, downsizing, or reorganization.  VSIP allows agencies that are downsizing or restructuring to offer employees lump-sum payments as an incentive to voluntarily retire or resign.  Requests must be submitted to ASA/OHR for OPM approval.
Reassignments.  See also Workforce Restructuring/Summary of Reassignment at OPM.gov.
To avoid a RIF, management may reassign employee(s) to another position(s) within the Division, or to avoid displacing an employee during a RIF, reassign surplus employee(s) to continuing position(s) as long as there is a legitimate need for the employee in the position. An employee may be reassigned without regard to the RIF regulations when the vacant position is at the same grade or rate of pay as the employee’s present position.  Such reassignments can help avoid involuntary separations and demotions which are covered by RIF.
The position to which the employee is reassigned may be located in the same or a different competitive level, competitive area, or commuting area.
An employee may not be reassigned to a position with greater promotion potential unless the position is filled following merit promotion procedures.
Reassignment to a position in a different commuting area does not provide the employee with the right to compete for a position in his or her present competitive area under RIF regulations even if the employee declines the reassignment and is subsequently separated under adverse action procedures.
An employee separated for declining reassignment to a position in a different commuting area qualifies for most of the benefits available to an employee who is separated by RIF, including severance pay or discontinued service retirement, career transition services (covered in HHS Instruction, 330-2, Priority Placement Programs), and CTAP/ICTAP eligibility.  The employee is not eligible to register for HHS’ RPL or PRL lists, consistent with OPM’s Workforce Reshaping Operations Handbook.
Transfer of Function.  Under conditions specified in 5 CFR Part 351, Subpart C, a transfer of function occurs when a function ceases in one competitive area and is moved to another competitive area(s) that did not perform the function at the time of transfer. Competing employees do not have the right to transfer with their work, unless the alternative is separation or downgrading by RIF.  Additional guidance on transfer of function can be found in OPM’s Workforce Reshaping Operations Handbook.
Reduction in Force is used as a last resort to reduce the workforce via separation, demotion, or a furlough for more than 30 continuous days or more than 22 discontinuous workdays.  Each OpDiv/StaffDiv must comply with the requirements in this Instruction; any HHS, OPM, and OMB supplemental guidance; and applicable federal laws, regulations, and collective bargaining agreements prior to implementing a RIF or engaging in RIF activities.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Heads determine if a RIF is necessary, what positions will be impacted or abolished, their geographic location, and the effective date of the RIF.  ASA/OHR approval is required before the RIF is enacted within the OpDiv/StaffDiv, and requests will include the following information:
The reasons(s), among those in 5 CFR §351.201(a)(2), for the action; and
An organization chart with titles, series, grades, and numbers of all involved positions.
The OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Center then establishes retention register(s) to determine which employee(s) are actually reached for a RIF action, on the basis of the employees’ tenure, veteran preference, performance ratings, and total creditable service (5 CFR Part 51 Subparts D and E).
OpDivs/StaffDivs ensure its RIF procedures are uniformly and consistently applied before furloughing, separating or demoting an employee, in accordance with 5 CFR §351.201(c).
Performance or conduct based actions covered by 5 U.S.C. Chapters 43 and 75 are not RIF actions.
Applicable master or locally negotiated agreement provisions must be followed in administering actions affecting bargaining unit employees.
351-1-60 Reduction in Force Planning – Filling Vacancies
Although management is not obligated to fill vacancies prior to or during a RIF, necessary and continuing vacancies should be used, to the extent possible, to provide placement opportunities for employees who will be adversely impacted by a RIF.  When management chooses to offer vacancies using RIF procedures, qualifications may be waived in accordance with 5 CFR §351.703.
After a reorganization is announced in writing and prior to a RIF, eligible employees may be allowed to volunteer to accept lower-graded positions.  Employees who take such positions are given grade and pay retention, if eligible, in accordance with 5 CFR Part 536.
Promotions or other placements into vacant positions prior to a RIF that have greater promotion potential than employees' current positions must be made under competitive merit promotion procedures.
During a RIF, vacancies may be used to satisfy employees' assignment rights in accordance with 5 CFR §351.201.
Employees without assignment rights who have received specific RIF separation notices may be offered vacant, lower-grade positions without regard to the grade limits specified under 5 CFR §351.701.  These offers may be made so long as the position would not constitute a better RIF offer to other competing employees.  Eligible employees who voluntarily accept lower-graded positions are entitled to grade and pay retention benefits.
351-1-70 Reduction in Force Planning – Competitive Areas
OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Centers must establish and document the competitive area(s) within their respective Division prior to RIF, in accordance with 5 CFR §351.402 and this Instruction.
The competitive area defines the scope of RIF competition.  Employees in a competitive area compete for retention only with other employees in the same competitive area.
 
Image
A graph explaining key terms found in policy, i.e., competitive area and competitive level
The competitive area includes all employees within the organizational unit(s) and geographical location(s) within the local commuting area.
The minimum competitive area is an organizational unit independent from other organizational units within a local commuting area because of differences in work function, staff, and separate administration (or the ability of managers within the organizational unit to authorize personnel actions, including ability to establish and abolish positions, assign duties, etc.).
There is no maximum size for a competitive area; however large competitive areas typically result in a more expensive RIF due to payment of relocation costs for employees placed in positions outside their duty commuting area, state, etc.
When an OpDiv/StaffDiv has offices in more than one local commuting area, each local commuting area may be designated as a separate competitive area.
A separate competitive area is established for each Inspector General Activity covered by the Inspector General Act of 1978, P.L. 95-452, as amended, in accordance with 5 CFR §351.402(d).
Telecommuters. An employee who telecommutes competes in RIF on the basis of the duty station or work site documented for the employee’s official position of record.  The same definition and standards for competitive areas in 5 CFR §351.402 apply to work performed directly on-site as to work performed remotely or by telecommuters.  OpDivs/StaffDivs still draw geographical and organizational boundaries using the regulatory minimum standard.  This could mean that geographically dispersed employees are in the same organizational unit, but in different local commuting areas.  OpDivs/StaffDivs then must decide, after meeting the minimum standard, how wide they want to open up the RIF competitive areas.
Example: An organizational unit is defined as the competitive area and the unit has 15 employees, with 10 located in Washington, DC and 5 full-time telecommuters in Atlanta, GA. There are two options for the competitive area in this example – 1) The telecommuters can compete in the same competitive area as the 10 employees located in Washington, DC (relocation costs are then a consideration as the employee may have to move to Washington, DC), or 2) A separate competitive area may be established for those 5 employees in Atlanta.

Establishing the scope of RIF competition, or Competitive Area, is to balance RIF manageability, cost factors, and the ability to minimize disruption to the mission while optimizing placement opportunities for employees and limiting adverse impact.  Some questions to consider when defining a competitive area:
Is the need for a RIF spread throughout the OpDiv/StaffDiv, or
Is it confined to a particular function or organization?
Is the organization impacted geographically dispersed?
How many positions and people are impacted – a dozen? Several hundred? A few thousand? Is the entire organization being closed?
Can the RIF be reasonably managed using the established competitive area definition?
If the competitive area spans different commuting areas, have relocation costs been accounted for?
When a competitive area is established within 90 days prior to the effective date of a RIF, it must be approved by OPM (5 CFR §351.402(c)).  Requests for OPM approval are sent by the Human Resources Director to ASA/OHR at employmentpolicy@hhs.gov and contain the following information:
Identification of the proposed competitive area, including the organization name, geographic location, and limits to the local commuting area;
A description of how the proposed area differs from the one previously established for the same organizational unit and geographic area;
An organizational chart of the OpDiv/StaffDiv;
The number of competing employees in the proposed competitive area;
A description of the operation, work function, staff, and personnel administration of the proposed area and, where appropriate, a description of how the area is separate from others in these respects; and
A description of the circumstances that led to the proposal to establish a new competitive area less than 90 days before a proposed RIF.
351-1-80 Reduction in Force Planning – Competitive Levels
OpDivs/StaffDivs must establish and document the competitive levels within their respective Division, in accordance with 5 CFR §351.403 and this Instruction (see also Appendix, HHS Competitive Level Codes).  ASA/OHR must concur on the establishment of new competitive levels.
Each competitive level includes all positions within a competitive area that are the same grade, series, and similar duties (based on the official position of record, not the employee’s qualifications), position qualification requirements, pay schedules, and working conditions so the OpDiv/StaffDiv may reassign the incumbent of one position to another position within the competitive level without undue interruption. (Note: Whether or not a security clearance requirement is in the employee’s official position description, separate competitive levels for otherwise interchangeable positions may be established if the clearance approval process would extend more than 90 days past the RIF effective date, resulting in undue interruption.)
Separate competitive levels are established for certain positions: competitive and excepted service; excepted service appointment authority; pay systems; work schedules (e.g., full-time, part-time, seasonal, or intermittent); and positions filled for formally designated trainee or development programs.
OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Centers establish and implement a plan for assigning a competitive level code to positions at the time of classification.  The code is documented on the OF-8 of the position description (PD) and in the enterprise-wide HR and payroll processing system.  Competitive level determinations should be reviewed whenever there is a change in classification or change to the position description (i.e. duties, responsibilities, qualifications, etc.).
351-1-90 Reduction in Force Planning – Other Required Actions
Leadership Decisions.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Heads must identify, based on mission and/or budget, which functions/positions must be abolished and which functions/positions will remain (by job title, series, grade, organization, and geographic location).  This information is provided to their servicing HR Center in order to administer the RIF and determine which employees will be impacted.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Heads must establish a RIF effective date and provide it to their HR Center.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Heads must decide, in consultation with their HR Center, if temporary employees and/or reemployed annuitants will be terminated before a RIF.
If temporary employees who are not eligible to compete in a RIF (i.e., who are not identified as competing employees under 5 CFR §§351.501(b)(3) and 502((b)(3)) are not terminated prior to a RIF, they are released before a competing employee from the same competitive level is released, in accordance with 5 CFR §351.602.
If reemployed annuitants are not terminated prior to the RIF effective date, they compete in the RIF on the same basis as other employees holding the same type of appointment, per OPM’s Workforce Reshaping Operations Handbook.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Heads may offer vacant positions to displaced employees, or as offers in lieu of a RIF action (see Section 351-1-60, RIF Planning - Filling Vacancies).
OpDiv/StaffDiv Heads, in consultation with their HR Center, may waive qualification requirements to assign an employee to a vacant position, in lieu of furlough or separating, provided the employee meets minimum educational requirements and has the capacity to perform the duties and responsibilities of the position, in accordance with 5 CFR §351.703.
Develop Communications Strategy
Once the OpDiv/StaffDiv Head determines the need for a RIF, OpDivs/StaffDivs must develop a RIF communication plan for disseminating information, and communicating with unions, leadership, employees and other stakeholders on a regular basis.
HR Centers must provide impacted employees access to information concerning RIF procedures, regulations, career assistance programs and services available to surplus and displaced employees, severance pay, and employee benefits and retirement, in accordance with 5 CFR §§351.802(b), 803(a), and HHS Instruction 330-2, Priority Placement Programs.
Employees who have received a specific RIF notice, their representatives, and authorized OPM or HHS official(s) are entitled to inspect the retention register and related records, in accordance with 5 CFR §351.505.
Ensure Personnel Records Are Accurate
OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Centers must manually verify employees’ official position descriptions; three (3) most recent performance ratings of record; creditable federal civilian and military service; service computation date; and veteran preference status before administering a RIF.
Employees should be given opportunity to update their personnel records, including submitting an updated resume.
HR Centers may establish a cut-off date for employees to submit updated personnel information for inclusion in their electronic Official Personnel Files (e-OPF).  (Note: Employees have a 30-day mandatory cut-off prior to issuance of RIF notices to submit performance ratings (e.g., from another agency), after which no new performance ratings are put on record and used for purposes of the RIF. See also Section 351-1-100, RIF Procedures, A.7.b. below.)
HR Centers ensure that any cut-off date is included in their Division’s communications strategy and is widely publicized at least 30 days prior to the deadline for receipt of information.
351-1-100 RIF Procedures
Retention Registers. To determine which employees are impacted by a RIF action, OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Centers apply the four (4) RIF retention factors (i.e., tenure, veteran preference, performance ratings, and length of service) to each competing employee in the competitive level(s) involved in the RIF, in accordance with 5 CFR Part 351, Subparts D and E.  (The competitive level(s) then becomes the retention register(s) which lists competing employees in the order of their retention standing.)
Competing Employees are employees within the competitive level, and also include employees identified under 5 CFR §§351.404 and 405.
Employees Not Listed on Retention Register.  Employees on military duty with a restoration right are not listed on a retention register, in accordance with 5 CFR §351.404.
Employees Listed Separately from Retention Register.  In accordance with 5 CFR §351.404 and OPM’s Workforce Reshaping Operations Handbook, the following employees who are in the competitive level are listed separately from the retention register(s):
Employees on temporary appointments. If certain temporary employees (i.e., those not identified as competing employees under 5 CFR §§351.501(b)(3) and 502((b)(3)) are not released prior to a RIF, these temporary employees in the competitive level are listed separately from the retention register.
Employees on temporary or term promotions, with the expiration date of their promotion.
Employees who have received a final written decision of removal due to unacceptable performance or an adverse action.
Determining Retention Standing – Tenure (5 CFR §§351.501(a-b) and 502). Competing employees are ranked in descending (i.e., highest to lowest) order according to their tenure (I, II, or III), or type of appointment.
Determining Retention Standing – Veteran Preference (5 CFR §351.501(c)).  Each of the tenure groups are then divided into subgroups based on the competing employee’s veteran preference under RIF procedures.
Determining Retention Standing - Length of Service (5 CFR §351.503).  Within each subgroup, competing employees are then ranked by their respective service dates, including both creditable federal civilian and military service.
Determining Retention Standing – Performance (5 CFR §351.504).  HHS employees receive extra retention service credit for performance based on the average of their last three (3) most recent performance ratings of record during the four (4) year period prior to the 30-day performance cut-off date:
OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Centers adhere to the chart below to apply additional service credit for performance.
A 30-day cut-off date prior to issuance of the RIF notices is established, after which no new performance ratings are put on record and used for purposes of the RIF.
A performance summary rating of record is defined as one that is assigned at the end of the appraisal period that was signed, approved, and issued to the employee by an appropriate management official, or a rating of record assigned following completion of a performance improvement period.
 
HHS Summary Level Pattern	Rating Levels	Rating Pattern	Years of Service for Retention
H	5	Outstanding	20
H	4	Achieved More Than Expected Results	16
H	3	Achieved Expected Results	12
H	2	Partially Achieved	0
H	1	Unacceptable/Unsatisfactory	0
An employee who does not have three (3) ratings of record is granted service credit for performance in accordance with 5 CFR §351.504(c) and the modal rating definition in this Instruction.
Indian Health Service (IHS).  When a RIF is conducted in IHS, retention registers for competitive and excepted service employees are combined in accordance with 25 U.S.C. §5117.
Administrative Law Judges.  To determine retention standing for Administrative Law Judges, see 5 CFR §930.210.
Release From Competitive Level.
OpDiv/StaffDivs determine each employee’s retention standing as of the effective date of the RIF, except for the following:
Mandatory exceptions listed under 5 CFR §351.606;
Permissive continuing exceptions under 5 CFR §351.607; and
Permissive temporary exceptions listed under 5 CFR §351.608.
The reasons for any exceptions used must be recorded on the retention register.
Employees are released in the inverse order of their retention standing, beginning with the employee with the lowest retention standing on the retention register, in accordance with 5 CFR Part 351, Subpart F, and OPM’s Workforce Reshaping Operations Handbook.
OpDiv/StaffDivs may not release a competing employee from a competitive level while retaining in that level an employee with a lower retention standing, except as specified by 5 CFR §351.601.
Before releasing a competing employee from a competitive level, the OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Center, releases all employees within that level who are listed under 5 CFR §351.602 and A.3. above.
OpDivs/StaffDivs may furlough a competing employee (i.e., place employee(s) in a non-duty, non-pay status more than 30 calendar days, or for more than 22 discontinuous workdays), in accordance with 5 CFR §351.604.
When all positions within a competitive area will be abolished within 180 days, employees are released in the order described in 5 CFR §351.605.
Assignment Rights (5 CFR Part 351, Subpart G).
An employee who is released from a competitive level is offered assignment to another position. If the employee accepts, the employee is assigned to the position offered. If the employee does not accept, the employee is furloughed or separated.
The existence of an available position does not require the OpDiv/StaffDiv to offer an employee a particular position; however, as specified in 5 CFR §351.701, an available position establishes the employee’s right to be offered a position that has no reduction, or the least possible reduction, in representative rate; is in the same competitive area; be at least 3 months in duration; and have the same type of work schedule as the position from which the employee is released.
The promotion potential of the offered position is not a consideration in determining an employee’s assignment rights to an available position; however, the employee must be qualified for the position, in accordance with 5 CFR §351.701.
Qualification determinations are made in accordance with 5 CFR §351.702.  If an OpDiv/StaffDiv determines, on the basis of evidence, that a 30% compensably disabled preference eligible employee is unable to perform the physical requirements of a position to which the employee would have otherwise been assigned, a request is submitted to ASA/OHR for final OPM determination and, upon notice from OHR that the request was sent to OPM, the OpDiv/StaffDiv notifies the employee in writing of the reasons of the decision within 15 days and before any other employee is selected for the position, in accordance with 5 CFR §351.702(d).
An OpDiv/StaffDiv Head, in consultation with their HR Center, may waive qualification requirements if s/he elects to assign employee(s) to vacant position(s), in lieu of furloughing or separating, in accordance with 5 CFR §351.703, if the employee has the capacity, adaptability, and skills needs to perform the duties of the vacant position and meets the minimum education requirements for the position.
HHS does not elect to adopt the discretionary assignment actions under 5 CFR §351.705(a)(1-2) that permit a competing employee to displace an employee with a lower retention standing in the same subgroup, or displace an employee in a higher subgroup.
In accordance with 5 CFR §351.705, HHS excepted service employees are provided assignment rights to other excepted positions under the same appointment authority.
Upon accepting an offer of assignment, or displacing another employee, the employee retains the same status and tenure in the new position.
Grade and Pay Retention: Employees who are downgraded after receiving a specific RIF notice and accept a lower-graded position offered by management are entitled to grade retention and retain the grade held immediately before the reduction for a period of two (2) years, if the employee(s) served at least 52 consecutive weeks at the higher grade. Additionally, employees who are placed in a lower-graded position by a reclassification action described in this Instruction are also eligible for grade retention on the same basis as employees who are voluntarily downgraded.  The retained grade is treated as the employee’s grade for all purposes (e.g., pay, retirement and life insurance, eligibility for training and promotion).  After grade retention expires, employees are eligible for indefinite pay retention.  Employees who do not meet the eligibility requirements for grade retention (i.e., have not served at least 52 consecutive weeks at the higher grade at the time of downgrading) are also eligible for pay retention. See 5 U.S.C. Subchapter VI, and 5 CFR Part 536 for additional guidance.  Title 38 Market Pay Positions are not entitled to grade or pay retention; however, employees are given pay retention in some circumstances as described in OPM Title 38 Delegation to HHS.
351-1-110 Specific RIF Notices
Before issuing RIF notices to employees informing them that they will be impacted by RIF, OpDiv/StaffDiv Heads notify the ASA/OHR of any RIF within their Division, in accordance with this Instruction.
OpDiv/StaffDivs adhere to the procedures described in 5 CFR Part 351, Subpart H, and this Instruction when issuing RIF notices.
When 50 or more employees in a competitive area are to be separated, the OpDiv/StaffDiv must notify ASA/OHR in writing before satisfying the notice requirements under 5 CFR §351.803(b).  A memo to the Assistant Secretary for Administration (ASA) includes the information listed in 5 CFR §351.803(c).  After review, ASA/OHR informs the OpDiv/StaffDiv when notice is sent to OPM to coordinate the release of both notification and separation notices as specified under 5 CFR §351.803(b).
When a RIF is caused by an unforeseeable situation, the OpDiv/StaffDiv Head must submit a request to the ASA/OHR for OPM approval to provide employees a specific RIF notice of less than 60 days, but at least 30 days, before the effective date of release.  Such requests include the information specified in 5 CFR §351.801(b).
An employee is entitled to a RIF notice of at least 60 full days if the OpDiv/StaffDiv decides to take an action more severe than first specified (5 CFR §351.805).  If the negotiated agreement or union contract specifies a longer time frame, the time frame(s) in the agreement are followed.
To assist employees in career transition and placement assistance prior to RIF separation, OpDiv/StaffDivs may issue Certificates of Expected Separation after the appropriate HHS leadership officials are notified in accordance with this Instruction and when the conditions specified under 5 CFR §351.807 are met.  Such certificates are signed by the OpDiv/StaffDiv Head, unless otherwise instructed by the Office of the Secretary.
351-1-120 Priority Placement Assistance
HHS employees who receive a specific RIF separation notice, Certificate of Expected Separation, or other official certification issued by the Department/OpDiv/StaffDiv; and
Received a performance rating of record of at least fully successful or equivalent as their most recent performance rating; and
Has not declined an offer of employment under RIF procedures (5 CFR Part 351, Subpart G) with the same type of work schedule and with a representative rate at least as high as the position from which the employee was separated, are generally eligible for priority selection for similar positions as described in HHS Instruction 330-2, Priority Placement Programs, in accordance with 5 CFR Parts 302 and 330, and 5 CFR §351.803(a).
OpDivs/StaffDivs should consult HHS Instruction 330-2, Priority Placement Programs, to determine their responsibility for notifying employees of their eligibility for reemployment and other placement assistance, and provide career transition services.
351-1-130 Appeals and Corrective Actions
Right to Appeal to MSPB.  An employee who has been furloughed for more than 30 days, separated, or demoted by a RIF action has the right to appeal to the Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB) if he or she believes the agency did not properly follow the RIF regulations, in accordance with 5 CFR §351.901.  The appeal must be filed during the 30-day period beginning the day after the effective date of the RIF action. OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Centers must advise affected employees of their appeal rights to MSPB when the specific RIF notice is issued.
Right to Grieve.  An employee covered by a collective bargaining agreement that covers RIF actions must follow the negotiated grievance procedure outlined in the agreement if the employee believes the agency failed to properly apply the RIF regulations.  If the agreement excludes RIF actions, then the employee may appeal to the MSPB within 30 days after the effective date of the RIF action, but may not use the grievance procedure.  An employee who alleges discrimination under 5 U.S.C. §2302(b)(1) has the option of either filing a grievance under the negotiated grievance procedure or filing an appeal to the MSPB, in accordance with 5 U.S.C. §7121(d).  HR Centers must advise affected employees of their rights when the specific RIF notice is issued.
Corrective Actions.  When an action under this Instruction was unjustified or unwarranted and an individual is restored to the former grade or rate of pay held or to an intermediate grade or rate of pay, the restoration shall be made retroactively effective to the date of the improper action per 5 CFR §351.902.
351-1-140 Documentation and Accountability
OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Centers are responsible for maintaining correct personnel records that are used to determine retention standing and all registers and records related to a RIF for at least one (1) year after the date specific RIF notices are issued, in accordance with 5 CFR §351.505(a) and (f).
Records involved in litigation and grievance processes may be destroyed only after official notification is received from OPM, Department of Justice, courts, or the Office of the General Counsel, etc. that the matter has been fully litigated, or resolved and closed.
ASA/OHR may conduct periodic accountability reviews to analyze compliance with this Instruction, HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and applicable federal laws and regulations.
Appendix, HHS Competitive Level Codes
The Competitive Level Codes (CLCs) below uses the first three (3) characters in the CLC field.  The fourth character is used to further identify competitive levels:

Competitive Service
Excepted Service     **Additional CLCs may be used to further define the excepted authority
Full-time
Part-time
Intermittent
Temp or seasonal
Training/Development
[Reserved]
[Reserved]
This appendix does not contain CLCs for the GS-0301 or GS-0303 series since the duties of these positions are generally unique to the organization.  Additionally, most GS-'01' series are omitted.  OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Centers are responsible for assigning a CLC for these positions in their serviced Division. 

CLC	Position Series	Position Title
SFA	GS-0018	Safety Analyst
SFT	GS-0019	Safety Technician
CPN	GS-0020	Community Planner
EPS	GS-0028	Environmental Planning Specialist
EPT	GS-0029	Environmental Technician
FPI	GS-0072	Fingerprint Identification
CHP	GS-0060	Chaplain
SEC	GS-0080	Security Specialist
FFT	GS-0081	Firefighter
POF	GS-0083	Police Officer
SCG	GS-0085	Security Guard
SCA	GS-0086	Security Assistant
EMS	GS-0089	Emergency Management Specialist
STN	GS-xx99	Student- all series ending in "99"
SSA	GS-0101	Social Science (Research) Analyst or Social Scientist 
SST	GS-0102	Social Science Technician
HIS	GS-0107	Health Insurance Specialist
ECO	GS-0110	Economist
ECA	GS-0119	Economist Assistant/Technician
IRS	GS-0132	Intelligence Research/Operations
MDS	GS-0142	Manpower Developer
GEG	GS-0150	Geographer
CRA	GS-0160	Civil Rights Analyst
HST	GS-0170	Historian
PSY	GS-0180	Psychologist
PYT	GS-0181	Psychologist Technician
SOC	GS-0184	Sociologist
SWA	GS-0185	Social Worker
SSN	GS-0186	Social Services Assistant/Technician
SWT	GS-0187	Social Work Assistant/Technician
RCS	GS-0188	Recreation Specialist
RCT	GS-0189	Recreation Assistant/Technician
ANT	GS-0190	Anthropologist
HRG	GS-0201	Human Resources Specialist (Generalist)
HRR	GS-0201	Human Resources Specialist (Recruitment)
HRC	GS-0201	Human Resources Specialist (Classification)
HRP	GS-0201	Human Resources Specialist (Compensation)
HRL	GS-0201	Human Resources Specialist (Labor Relations)
HRE	GS-0201	Human Resources Specialist (Employee Relations)
HEL	GS-0201	Human Resources Specialist (Employee and Labor Relations)
HRB	GS-0201	Human Resources Specialist (Benefits)
HRI	GS-0201	Human Resources Specialist (Information Systems)
HRD	GS-0201	Human Resources Specialist (Development)
HRM	GS-0201	Human Resources Specialist (Military)
HRT	GS-0203	Human Resources Assistant or Technician
EEO	GS-0260	Equal Employment Opportunity Specialist
MSG	GS-0302	Messenger
INR	GS-0304	Information Receptionist
MFC	GS-0305	Mail and/or File Clerk or Assistant
GIS	GS-0306	Government Information Specialist
CRC	GS-0309	Correspondence Analyst
SET	GS-0318	Secretary (Office Automation)
SES	GS-0318	Secretary (Stenography)
CKT	GS-0322	Clerk-Typist
OAG	GS-0326	Office Automation Clerk or Assistance
COP	GS-0332	Computer Operator
COA	GS-0335	Computer Assistant/Technician
PMG	GS-0340	Program Manager
ADO	GS-0341	Administrative Officer
SSS	GS-0342	Support Services
MAA	GS-0343	Management Analyst
PGA	GS-0343	Program Analyst
PMA	GS-0343	Program and Management Analyst
MAT	GS-0344	Management or Program Assistant or Technician
LMS	GS-0346	Logistics Management Specialist
EQO	GS-0350	Equipment Operator
DTA	GS-0356	Data Transcriber
CDG	GS-0357	Coding Clerk
EES	GS-0360	Equal Employment Compliance Specialist
EET	GS-0361	Equal Employment Opportunity Assistant/Technician
TLO	GS-0382	Telephone Operator
TSD	GS-0391	Telecommunications Specialist (Data)
TSV	GS-0391	Telecommunications Specialist (Voice)
BIO	GS-0401	Biologist
MBI	GS-0403	Microbiologist
BOT	GS-0404	Biological Assistant/Technician
PHC	GS-0405	Pharmacologist
ECT	GS-0408	Ecologist
ZGT	GS-0410	Zoologist
PYG	GS-0413	Physiologist
ETG	GS-0414	Entomologist
TOX	GS-0415	Toxicologist
PPT	GS-0434	Plant Pathologist
GEN	GS-0440	Geneticist
ASC	GS-0487	Animal Scientist
FMS	GS-0501	Financial Management Specialist
FMA	GS-0503	Financial Management Assistant
FMG	GS-0505	Financial Manager
ACC	GS-0510	Accountant
ACA	GS-0510	Cost Accountant
ACS	GS-0510	Systems Accountant
ADT	GS-0511	Auditor
ACT	GS-0525	Accounting Assistant or Technician
CCK	GS-0530	Cash Clerk
VEX	GS-0540	Voucher Examiner
CPT	GS-0544	Civilian Pay Technician
MPT	GS-0545	Military Pay Technician
BUD	GS-0560	Budget Analyst
BUA	GS-0561	Budget Technician/Assistant
EPI	GS-0601	Epidemiologist
HSC	GS-0601	Health Scientist
MDG	GS-0602	Physician (General Practice)
MDI	GS-0602	Physician (Internal Medicine)
MDF	GS-0602	Physician (Family Practice)
MDM	GS-0602	Physician (Emergency Medicine)
MDO	GS-0602	Physician (Orthopedics)
MDE	GS-0602	Physician (Ophthalmology)
MDP	GS-0602	Physician (Psychiatry)
MDN	GS-0602	Physician (Otolaryngology
MDC	GS-0602	Physician (Pediatrics)
MDT	GS-0602	Physician (Anesthesiology)
MDR	GS-0602	Physician (Radiology)
MDH	GS-0602	Physician (Public Health)
PAA	GS-0603	Physician Assistant
NUG	GS-0610	Nurse (General)
NUC	GS-0610	Nurse Consultant
NUS	GS-0610	Nurse Specialist
NUP	GS-0610	Nurse Practitioner
NUN	GS-0610	Community Health Nurse
NUO	GS-0610	Occupational Health Nurse
NUM	GS-0610	Nurse Midwife
NUA	GS-0610	Nurse Anesthesiologist
NUE	GS-0610	Nurse Educator
NUY	GS-0610	Psychiatric Nurse
NUR	GS-0610	Operating Room Nurse
NUL	GS-0610	Nurse Clinician
LPN	GS-0620	Licensed Practical Nurse
NAT	GS-0621	Nurse Assistant
MST	GS-0622	Medical Supply Technician
NUT	 GS-0630	Nutritionist/Dietitian
OTH	GS-0631	Occupational Therapist
PTH	GS-0633	Physical Therapist
PTA	GS-0636	Physical Therapist Technician/Assistant
REC	GS-0638	Recreation Therapist
HLT	GS-0640	Health Technician
NMT	GS-0642	Nuclear Medicine Technician
MET	GS-0644	Medical Technologist
MTN	GS-0645	Medical Technician
PTN	GS-0646	Pathology Technician
DRT	GS-0647	Diagnostic Radiology Technician
MIT	GS-0649	Medical Instruments Technician
RTN	GS-0651	Respiratory Therapy
PHM	GS-0660	Pharmacist
PHT	GS-0661	Pharmacy Technician
OPT	GS-0662	Optometrist
AUD	GS-0665	Audiologist
POD	GS-0668	Podiatrist
MRA	GS-0669	Medical Records Administrator
HAS	GS-0670	Health System Administrator
HSS	GS-0671	Health System Specialist
HHK	GS-0673	Hospital Housekeeper
MRT	GS-0675	Medical Records Technician
MRN	GS-0679	Medical Records Assistant
DOF	GS-0680	Dental Officer
DAT	GS-0681	Dental Assistant
DHG	GS-0682	Dental Hygienist
DLT	GS-0683	Dental Laboratory Technician
PHV	GS-0685	Public Health Advisor
PHA	GS-0685	Public Health Analyst/Policy
SAN	GS-0688	Sanitarian
IHY	GS-0690	Industrial Hygienist
CSO	GS-0696	Consumer Safety Officer
EHL	GS-0698	Environmental Health
VET	GS-0701	Veterinarian
AHT	GS-0704	Animal Health Technician
ENG	GS-0801	General Engineer
EGT	GS-0802	Engineering Technician
ENS	GS-0803	Safety Engineer
ENF	GS-0804	Fire Protection Engineer
ENE	GS-0806	Materials Engineer
ENL	GS-0807	Landscape Architect
ART	GS-0808	Architect
CON	GS-0809	Construction Inspector
ENC	GS-0810	Civil Engineer
DFT	GS-0818	Draftsman
ENV	GS-0819	Environmental Engineer
ENM	GS-0830	Mechanical Engineer
ELN	GS-0850	Electrical Engineer
ENP	GS-0854	Computer Engineer
ENR	GS-0855	Electronics Engineer
ENT	GS-0856	Engineering Technician
ENB	GS-0858	Bio-Medical Engineer
ENN	GS-0880	Mining Engineer
ENU	GS-0881	Petroleum Engineer
ENA	GS-0890	Agricultural Engineer
ENH	GS-0893	Chemical Engineer
ENI	GS-0896	Industrial Engineer
LGG	GS-0901	General Legal
LCK	GS-0904	Law Clerk
ATT	GS-0905	General Attorney
ALJ	GS-0935	Administrative Law Judge
PLS	GS-0950	Paralegal Analyst or Specialist
CNR	GS-0962	Contact Representative
LIE	GS-0963	Legal Instruments Examiner
PSP	GS-0967	Passport Specialist
LGA	GS-0986	Legal Assistant
CLK	GS-0998	Claims Clerk
IDS	GS-1008	Interior Design
EXS	GS-1010	Exhibition Specialist
CUR	GS-1015	Curator
ILL	GS-1020	Illustrator
PAS	GS-1035	Public Affairs Specialist
LAN	GS-1040	Language Specialist
LAT	GS-1046	Language Technician
PHO	GS-1060	Photographer
AVS	GS-1071	Audio-Visual Specialist
WED	GS-1082	Writer-Editor
TWE	GS-1083	Technical Writer-Editor
VIS	GS-1084	Visual Information Specialist
EDA	GS-1087	Editorial Assistant or Technician
CTS	GS-1102	Contracts Specialist
IPM	GS-1103	Industrial Property Manager
PDS	GS-1104	Property Disposal Specialist
PUA	GS-1105	Purchasing Agent
CTA	GS-1106	Contract Assistant or Technician
GMS	GS-1109	Grants Management Specialist
PDC	GS-1152	Production Control
FNA	GS-1160	Financial Analyst
RLS	GS-1170	Realty Specialist
HMA	GS-1173	Hospital Material Assistant
BUM	GS-1176	Building Manager
PAT	GS-1221	Patent Advisor
HPY	GS-1306	Health Physicist
PHY	GS-1310	Physicist
PST	GS-1311	Physical Science Technician
CEM	GS-1320	Chemist
GEO	GS-1350	Geologist
CTT	GS-1371	Cartographer Technician
FTN	GS-1382	Food Technologist
LIB	GS-1410	Librarian
LTH	GS-1411	Library Technician
TIS	GS-1412	Technical Information Specialist
ARC	GS-1420	Archivist
ATY	GS-1510	Actuary
ORA	GS-1515	Operations Research Analyst
MTH	GS-1520	Mathematician
MSC	GS-1529	Mathematical Statistician
STT	GS-1530	Statistician
STA	GS-1531	Statistical Assistant or Technician
CSC	GS-1550	Computer Scientist
DST	GS-1560	Data Scientist
FOS	GS-1640	Facilities Operations Specialist
PRS	GS-1654	Printing Specialist
EQS	GS-1654	Equipment Specialist
FDS	GS-1667	Food Service
EQV	GS-1670	Equipment Services
EDT	GS-1702	Education Technician
EDS	GS-1710	Education Specialist
TNS	GS-1712	Training Specialist
EDP	GS-1720	Education Programs
PHE	GS-1725	Public Health Educator
EDR	GS-1730	Education Research
ISS	GS-1750	Instructional System Specialist
IVA	GS-1802	Investigating Assistant
IVN	GS-1805	Investigative Analyst
INV	GS-1810	General Investigator
CIV	GS-1811	Criminal Investigator
CSI	GS-1862	Consumer Safety Inspector
QAS	GS-1910	Quality Assurance Specialist
SUS	GS-2001	General Supply Specialist
SPG	GS-2003	Supply Program
SUA	GS-2005	Supply Assistant or Technician
IMS	GS-2010	Inventory Management Specialist
DFS	GS-2030	Distribution Facilities Specialist
TSP	GS-2101	Transportation Specialist
 TCK	GS-2102	Transportation Clerk
TMG	GS-2130	Traffic Management
FRS	GS-2131	Freight Rate Specialist
TOP	GS-2150	Traffic Operations
MVD	GS-2151	Motor Vehicle Dispatching
ITZ	GS-2210	Information Technology Specialist
ITA	GS-2210	Information Technology Specialist (Systems Analyst)
ITP	GS-2210	Information Technology Specialist (Policy and Planning)
ITD	GS-2210	Information Technology Specialist (Data Management)
ITB	GS-2210	Information Technology Specialist (Systems Analysis & Data Management)
ITG	GS-2210	Information Technology Specialist (Programmer)
ITS	GS-2210	Information Technology Specialist (Security)
ITI 	GS-2210	Information Technology Specialist (Internet)
ITE	GS-2210	Information Technology Specialist (Enterprise Architect)
ITC	GS-2210	Information Technology Specialist (Customer Service)
ITO	GS-2210	Information Technology Specialist (Operations Systems)
ITJ	GS-2210	Information Technology Specialist (Project Management)
ITN	GS-2210	Information Technology Specialist (Network Services)
ITW	GS-2210	Information Technology Specialist (Application Software)
ITY	GS-2210	Information Technology Specialist (Systems Administration)
CLCs for HHS Wage Grade (WG) Positions
CLC	Position Series	Position Title
TPH	WG-2502	Telephone Mechanic
EMC	WG-2504	Electrical Mechanic
EIM	WG-2606	Electronic Industrial Contractor
ELT	WG-2805	Electrician
HVE	WG-2810	High Voltage Electrician
EER	WG-2854	Electrical Equipment Repair
FAB	WG-3105	Fabric Worker
INM	WG-3314	Instrument Maker
MAC	WG-3414	Machinist
LST	WG-3501	Laboratory Support
LAB	WG-3502	Laborer
LWK	WG-3511	Laboratory Worker
CUS	WG-3566	Custodial Worker
SMM	WG-3806	Sheet Metal Mechanic
SEO	WG-3901	Sound Equipment Operator
PNT	WG-4102	Painter
PFR	WG-4204	Pipefitter
PLB	WG-4206	Plumber
WWK	WG-4604	Wood Worker
WCF	WG-4605	Wood Crafter
CPN	WG-4607	Carpenter
MNS	WG-4701	Maintenance Scheduler
MMK	WG-4714	Model Maker
USM	WG-4742	Utility Systems Repairer/Mechanic
MWK	WG-4749	Maintenance Worker
 LOC	WG-4804	Locksmith
MPR	WG-4805	Mechanical Equip Repair
GDN	WG-5003	Gardner
ANC	WG-5048	Animal Caretaker
MMC	WG-5201	Miner Mechanic
ACM	WG-5306	Air Condition Equip Repair
BPR	WG-5309	Boiler Plant Equip Mechanic
ELV	WG-5313	Elevator Mechanic
IEM	WG- 5352	Industrial Equipment Mechanic
DSM	WG-5364	Door Systems Mechanic
PPD	WG-5401	Paper Disintegrator
BPO	WG-5402	Boiler Plant Operator
USO	WG-5406	Utility Systems Operator
WTO	WG-5408	Wastewater Treatment Plant Operator
MVO	WG-5703	Motor Vehicle Operator
TRO	WG-5705	Tractor Operator
 ETE	WG-5716	Engineering Equipment Operator
HMO	WG-5803	Heavy Mobile Equipment Mechanic
ATM	WG-5823	Automotive Mechanic
SCT	WG-6901	Sample Custodian
TPA	WG-6904	Tools and Parts Attendant
MHD	WG-6907	Materials Handler
MEI	WG-6912	Materials Examining/Identifying
LNW	WG-7304	Laundry Worker
COK	WG-7404	Cook
FSW	WG-7408	Food Service Worker
















990-003
990-003: Nursing Mothers Program
Effective Date: 6/21/2019

Document Change History
Version Number

Release Date

Summary of Changes

Section/Page

Changes Made By

1

6/21/2019

Release

N/A

Office of Human Resources
Policy & Accountability Division on behalf of Office of Assistant Secretary for Health
employmentpolicy@hhs.gov

Concur:
/s/

J. Blair Duncan
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources
6/17/2019

Approved:
/s/

Scott W. Rowell
Assistant Secretary for Administration
6/18/2019

A. Purpose
This guidance is provided to establish procedures and clarify legal requirements for the Nursing Mothers Program within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Service (HHS).

B. Coverage
This guidance covers all HHS Operating and Staff Divisions (OpDivs/StaffDivs) and must be carried out in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, bargaining agreements, and Departmental policy.

C. References
29 United States Code (U.S.C.), Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), Section 207(r)(1) (new) 
Public Law 111-148, Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, Section 4207, Breaks for Nursing Mothers - PDF
Office of Personnel Management (OPM): Guide for Establishing a Federal Nursing Mother’s Program, January 2013 - PDF
OPM Memo, Nursing Mothers in Federal Employment, December 22, 2010
HHS, U.S. Public Health Service, Office of the Surgeon General, The Surgeon General’s Call to Action to Support Breastfeeding, 2011
U.S. Department of Labor’s Wage and Hour Division, Changes to the FLSA: Break time for Nursing Mothers Provision
D. Responsibilities
HHS, Assistant Secretary for Administration, Office of Human Resources (OHR):
Develops Department-wide human resources guidance and policy consistent with HHS and Office of Personnel Management (OPM) policy, procedures and all applicable Federal laws and regulations; and
Periodically confirms Operating Divisions and Staff Divisions are adhering to HHS and OPM policy and guidance as well as all applicable Federal laws and regulations with regard to nursing mothers.
Operating Divisions and Staff Divisions:
Comply with this guidance, HHS and OPM policy, procedures and guidance, and all applicable Federal laws and regulations; and
Ensure that a private space is available and employees, who are nursing mothers, are given reasonable breaks to express milk.
E. General
HHS has been in the forefront of breastfeeding promotion and support for several decades.  HHS presents targets through Healthy People 2020 goals for breastfeeding:  81.9% of women initiating breastfeeding, 60% of babies being breastfed for at least 6 months, and 34% for a full year.  HHS also supports nursing mothers who want to express milk upon their return to the workplace after the birth of their infant.

According to the Department of Labor, mothers are among the fastest-growing segment of the U.S. labor force.  Recent data indicate that at least 62% of all mothers with children younger than 12 months are employed.  Approximately 70% of employed mothers with children younger than 3 years of age work full-time.  After pregnancy, one-third of these mothers return to work within 3 months, and two-thirds return within 6 months.

Research indicates that intentions to return to work full-time after giving birth are significantly associated with lower rates of breastfeeding initiation and shorter duration.  Some mothers will make the determination not to initiate breastfeeding in anticipation of returning to work.  Given the substantial presence of mothers in our Federal work force, HHS has served as a role model in establishing and assuring lactation support, through documents such as The Surgeon General’s Call to Action to Support Breastfeeding, which includes several action items directed toward employment.  OPM’s Guide for Establishing a Federal Nursing Mother’s Program, lists names of organizations who can provide information on breastfeeding, including the HHS, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Health (OASH), Office of Women’s Health.

F. Requirements
All working mothers who are civilian employees in the executive branch are entitled to breaks during the work day to express milk in a private space, in accordance with law and OPM guidance.
The Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) requires employers to provide ‘a reasonable break time for an employee to express milk for her nursing child for 1 year after the child’s birth each time such employee has need to express the milk;’ and ‘a place, other than a bathroom, that is shielded from view and free from intrusion from co-workers and the public, which may be used by an employee to express breast milk’ (29 U.S.C. § 207(r)(1)).  The Department of Labor refers to this as the Break Time for Nursing Mothers Provision (see References).
OpDivs/StaffDivs must assess their workforce and environment to determine the following:  the number of nursing mothers likely to use the facilities; space needed; resource needs (facilities, maintenance, supplies, etc.), and what, if any, recordkeeping will be necessary.  (Note:  OpDiv/StaffDivs are not obligated to provide space, if they don’t have an employee who needs to express milk; therefore HHS divisions will need to regularly monitor their workforce needs to ensure compliance with the law.)  Information about the lactation accommodations should be widely disseminated within each OpDiv/StaffDiv.  Each OpDiv/StaffDiv should assign the appropriate personnel to oversee operations required for the lactation room(s) and serve as the primary point of contact.
G. Procedures
Private Space.  In accordance with the law, OpDivs/StaffDivs must provide their employees who are nursing mothers with a space that is private - not a bathroom - and free from intrusion by co-workers and the public.  A space temporarily created or converted into a space for expressing milk or made available when needed by the nursing mother is sufficient, provided that the space is shielded from view and free from any intrusion by co-workers and the public.  If the space is not specifically dedicated for the nursing mother's use, it must be available when needed in order to meet legal requirements and OPM guidance.

It is incumbent upon HHS, as the lead Federal agency responsible for enhancing and protecting the health and well-being of all Americans, to ensure that each nursing mother's privacy is respected when determining the location of private spaces.
‘Aroom for nursing mothers is private space a nursing mother can use to express milk.  This space must be shielded from view and free from intrusion of others.  A nursing mother's room must be functional, with a private space with a place to sit and a flat surface, other than the floor, to place the breast pump and other supplies.  Although there are no size or permanency requirements, these rooms should provide access to electricity for the use of a breast pump, as well as good lighting, a comfortable temperature, and proper ventilation.  Further, a room for nursing mothers should be clean and agencies should provide cleaning wipes and paper towels’ (OPM’s Guide for Establishing a Federal Nursing Mother’s Program, page 3).

Lactation rooms should not be located in, or accessed through, bathrooms, locker rooms or similar facilities, but should be distinct spaces designed for their intended purpose.  Although a sink with hot and cold running water is not a requirement for a lactation room, a sink should be located in as close proximity as possible for handwashing and the washing/rinsing of pump attachments.  OpDivs/StaffDivs may determine the most appropriate means by which to provide private space for a nursing mother.  The following suggestions are provided for consideration:

Dedicated space – A permanent space dedicated as a milk expression room has been found to be an efficient option for many OpDivs/StaffDivs.  It eliminates the need to regularly assess workforce needs to ensure compliance with the law.  Room dimensions for a permanent space designated as a lactation room can vary.  However, a larger size room assures that handicapped users will be appropriately accommodated.
Multi-User space - Multi-user milk expression rooms serve as dedicated space, but are efficient by allowing more than one nursing mother to express milk at the same time.  Multi-user spaces can accommodate two or more nursing mothers, depending upon the need.  Privacy for individual users must be assured.  Privacy can be obtained by use of cubicle partitions or “stations” that include a privacy door with locks or may be obtained by use of a divider or privacy curtain.  The dividers must ensure that each station is completely private.
Flexible space - A variety of flexible spaces may be utilized, such as available offices, conference rooms, rest or break rooms, and other spaces.  Nursing mothers and their supervisors should work together to arrange scheduling for use of flexible spaces.  In the absence of a permanent dedicated milk expression room, a plan denoting clear communication will help nursing mothers know how they will be accommodated.  In addition, the space must be available whenever the nursing mother has the need to pump.
Pumping within a private office - If a nursing mother determines she would like to pump within her private office, any areas that allow visibility into the office should be covered while pumping.  When she is pumping in her private office, the nursing mother should ensure that there is a sign on the door of her office that indicates the need for privacy and indicates that people should not enter her office at that time.
Mobile space – When traditional permanent or flexible milk expression "rooms" are not available for nursing mothers who may be stationed primarily in outdoor settings, other options, such as pop-up tents, mobile options, or space in nearby buildings may provide a solution for flexible, portable options.  Other needs such as access to water should also be considered.
Basic lactation rooms may be created or re-purposed out of little used areas within existing building space.

OPM’s Guide for Establishing a Federal Nursing Mother’s Program (pages 9-14) covers the requirements for lactation rooms, as well as best practices found at other federal agencies, and ideas for creating ideal private spaces for working mothers.
Reasonable Break Time.  OpDivs/StaffDivs must provide a reasonable amount of break time to express milk as frequently as needed by the nursing mother for up to one year from her infant’s birth, as long as the mother continues to express milk, in accordance with OPM guidance.  Many mothers typically need to express their milk every 2 to 3 hours (OPM Guide for Establishing a Federal Nursing Mothers Program, page 8).  The frequency of breaks as well as the duration of each break will likely vary depending on the individual mother's needs.  Supervisors are required to use their best judgment based on discussions with their employee(s) to determine what is considered reasonable.  Supervisors may extend the time (beyond 1 year of the infant’s birth) based on discussions with the nursing mother and applicable collective bargaining agreements.

The FLSA does not require mothers to be compensated for breaks taken for the purpose of expressing milk.  However, in accordance with OPM guidance, when the OpDiv/StaffDiv already provides compensated breaks (e.g., 15 minutes in morning and 15 minutes in the afternoon) that employees can use for any purpose, an employee who uses that break time to express milk must be compensated in the same way that other employees are compensated for such break time.  A nursing mother may also work out a schedule with her supervisor that will allow her to come into the office earlier or leave later than the regular scheduled workday to accommodate nursing breaks. 
Workforce Flexibilities.  OpDiv/StaffDivs are encouraged to utilize current HHS workforce flexibilities to accommodate working mothers who are nursing.  Divisions should review their internal practices, procedures, and collective bargaining agreements before making determinations.  Examples:
Alternative Work Schedules (AWS) - Flexible or compressed work schedules may be established for a nursing mother who needs time off to express milk during normal working hours, consistent with 5 U.S.C. Chapter 61, Subchapter II, and 5 CFR, Part 610, Subpart D.  Consult OPM’s Handbook on Alternative Work Schedules, and Labor-Management Relations Guidance Bulletin: Negotiating Flexible and Compressed Work Schedules, both on OPM.gov, for additional guidance.
Leave and Other Paid Time Off - An employee may be allowed to use annual leave, leave without pay, compensatory time off, or credit hours.
Annual Leave - OpDivs/StaffDivs should be as accommodating as possible in reviewing and approving employee requests for annual leave to express milk, consistent with 5 CFR Part 630, Subpart C, and applicable collective bargaining agreements.
Leave Without Pay - At the discretion of the OpDiv/StaffDiv, leave without pay (LWOP) may be granted to an employee who requests breaks to express milk during normal working hours. Consistent with OPM guidance, OpDivs/StaffDivs are encouraged, whenever possible, to act favorably upon requests by employees for LWOP to express milk.
Compensatory Time Off – OpDivs/StaffDivs may approve requests to use compensatory time off that an employee has earned in exchange for performing an equal amount of time in irregular or occasional overtime work. For employees under flexible work schedules, OpDivs/StaffDivs may approve employee requests to earn compensatory time off for both regularly scheduled and irregular or occasional overtime work, as appropriate.
Credit Hours - Credit hours are hours within a flexible work schedule that an employee elects to work in excess of his or her basic work requirement (e.g., 80 hours in a pay period for a full-time employee) so as to vary the length of a workweek or workday. A nursing mother may be allowed, with supervisory approval, to use accumulated credit hours to fulfill her basic work requirement, thereby gaining time off from work to express milk. If an OpDiv/StaffDiv authorizes credit hours, the maximum amount of credit hours that may be carried over from one pay period to another is 24 hours.
Contractors and Visitors.  OpDivs/StaffDivs may, at their discretion, offer their lactation room/private space to contractors and visitors; however, it is not required.  (See F.1.)
Lactation Room Maintenance, Security, Support, Etc.
Sanitation – a trash can, paper towels, sanitary wipes and cleansers should be available in each lactation room.
Housekeeping – a regular schedule for daily cleaning of the lactation room and emptying of trash should be maintained.
Facilities - issues related to accessibility, housekeeping considerations, equipment maintenance, security (ex. locks, security camera,) involve facilities management.  In addition, facilities management provides solutions for adapting, converting or retrofitting existing space into lactation rooms to include both required and desired elements or features of the lactation room, and provides expertise in planning future building projects to include space for lactation rooms.
Security Personnel – It is recommended that security personnel be knowledgeable about the location of the lactation room or facilities, as well as procedures and appropriate personnel for acquiring information about the lactation room.  A sign indicating the location and designated point of contact for use of the lactation room should be visible upon entrance into the building.

Additionally, security personnel should be educated about the screening procedures for breast pumps and milk.  Security personnel may use their discretion and examine the actual pump manually.  Nursing mothers should not have to put their breast milk through a metal detector or X-ray screening machine.
Federal Occupational Health (FOH) Nurse or Wellness Coordinator – The FOH Nurse is a resource for developing and promoting the lactation program because of the skill he/she possesses in addressing health needs of employees.  FOH personnel can provide support for integrating the lactation program into existing employee health services.
Additional Guidance.

See OPM Fact Sheet and FAQs attached to OPM Memo, Nursing Mothers in Federal Employment, December 22, 2010.

See Appendix for breast pump information by the HHS Office of Assistant Secretary for Health (OASH), Office of Women’s Health.
G. Policy Information
Owned by: Office of Assistant Secretary for Health (OASH)
Effective date: June 21, 2019

Appendix:  Breast Pumps (provided by HHS, Office of Women’s Health)
Many OpDivs/StaffDivs provide multi-user breast pumps for their nursing mothers.  Breast pumps are considered medical devices and are regulated by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA).  While personal use breast pumps are intended for use by only one mother, multi-user electric pumps are designed and approved by the FDA to be safe for multiple users.  Multi-user electric breast pumps can be used by more than one nursing mother because they are designed with barriers that prevent cross contamination.  When multiple mothers use an electric multi-user breast pump, each individual user will need to use her own collection kit, consisting of breast pump tubing and milk collection bottles or bags.

Multi-user electric pumps have stronger, more powerful motors that provide a higher level of suction for more efficient pumping.  These pumps are larger and heavier, more durable and are generally covered by a 3 to 5 year manufacturer’s warranty.

A nursing mother has the option of using her own personal single use breast pump in the lactation room or area designated for pumping.

Typical Costs
Multi-user electric pumps will generally have a price range from approximately $1,000.00 - $2,000.00.

Personal use breast pumps (not for sharing) will generally have a range from approximately $150.00 - $500.00.
Cleaning Breast Pumps
Electrical units, which hold the motor and batteries, should be wiped down with a clean paper towel or soft cloth after each use.

The electrical unit should never be put into water or other liquids for cleaning.  It should also never be cleaned using a microwave sterilizer.

Breast pump manufacturers may have wipes specifically made for their cleaning breast pumps.

The instruction manual should always be consulted to determine which parts should be washed and the best method for removing parts that must be cleaned.

















590-1
Instruction 590-1: Title 38 Physician and Dentist Pay (PDP)
Material Transmitted:
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 590-1, Title 38 Physician, Dentist, and Podiatrist Pay, dated December 17, 2021.

Material Superseded:
HHS Instruction 590-1:  Title 38 Physician and Dentist Pay (PDP), dated January 1, 2016

Background:
This Instruction has been amended to reflect a change in the name of this program from Physician and Dentist Pay to Physician, Dentist, and Podiatrist Pay.  The acronym remains PDP.

Amended to reflect that Human Resource Directors have delegated authority to approve all Title 38 market pay proposals up to $350,000.  Approval for annual pay in excess of $350,000 is retained by the Assistant Secretary of Administration.

Addition of language that podiatrists are eligible to receive market pay.

Addition of medical specialty Podiatry (General) and Podiatry (Surgery-forefoot, refoot/ankle, advanced refoot/ankle), to pay table 1.  (Podiatrists became eligible for Market Pay effective, May 8, 2019.  The previous authorization before this effective date is revoked).

Addition of language that physicians receiving PDP are eligible to receive hazardous duty pay.  Hazardous duty pay is computed as a percentage of the employee’s GS base pay plus market pay.

Addition of language that physicians must have their pay reviewed at least once every 24 months.

Clarification that Title 38 physicians who receive market pay may be paid certain overseas allowances – foreign area COLA under 5 U.S.C. § 5924; post differential under 5 U.S.C. § 5925; and danger pay allowance under 5 U.S.C. § 5928).  Overseas allowances are computed as a percentage of the employee’s GS base pay plus market pay.

This issuance is effective immediately and must be carried out in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, bargaining agreements, and Departmental policy.

This policy is effective immediately and must be carried out by HHS Operating and Staff Division HR Centers in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, bargaining agreements, and Departmental policy.

/s/

Tia N. Butler
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources
and Chief Human Capital Officer, Acting

590-1-00 Sections
590-1-10 Purpose
590-1-20 Coverage and Exclusions
590-1-30 References
590-1-40 Definitions
590-1-50 Responsibilities
590-1-60 Policy
590-1-70 Documentation and Accountability
Exhibit A Delegation Authorities
Exhibit B OPDIV Physician, Dentist, and Podiatrist Tier Descriptions
Exhibit C Annual Pay Ranges for Physicians, Dentists, and Podiatrists

590-1-10: Purpose
This Instruction implements the Department of Health and Human Services regulations and procedures for Title 38 Physician, Dentist and Podiatrist Pay (PDP).

When provisions of this policy differ from applicable law or regulation, the law or regulation apply.

590-1-20: Coverage and Exclusions
Coverage:

The provisions of this Instruction apply to civilian physicians (0602), podiatrists (0668), and dentists (0680) (full-time, part-time, and intermittent) at GS-15 and below who:
Provide direct patient-care services, or services incident to direct patient-care services; and
Have been designated for coverage by appropriate legal authority.
As used in this document, the term “physician(s)” is used interchangeably to refer to a physician, podiatrist, and/or dentist.

Exclusions: This Instruction does not apply to individuals:
Currently serving in the Public Health Service (PHS) Commissioned Corps;
Serving in an internship or residency training program;
Senior Executive Service (SES), Executive Schedule (EX), Senior Level/Scientific (SL/ST), Senior Biomedical Research and Biomedical Product Assessment Service (SBRBPAS), executive level, or other senior-level systems;
Receiving Physicians Comparability Allowance (PCA) under 5 U.S.C. § 5948; or
Employed or paid under a Title 42 authority.
The provisions of this Instruction pertaining to conditions of employment of bargaining unit employees are fully negotiable in accordance with 5 U.S.C. Chapter 71, and such actions require notification to labor organizations when impacted employees are bargaining unit employees. When the provisions of this Instruction differ from the requirements contained in applicable collective bargaining agreement(s), the collective bargaining agreement takes precedence for bargaining unit employees.
590-1-30: References
Public Law (P.L.) 93-638 - PDF, § 105 (Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act)
P.L. 99-221 - PDF, § 3(a) (Cherokee Leasing Act)
P.L. 116-12 - PDF, (Clarification of Grade and Pay of Podiatrists of Department of Veterans Affairs)
38 U.S.C chapter 74  (Veterans’ Health Administration - Personnel)
5 U.S.C. § 5371  (Health Care Positions)
5 U.S.C. § 5545(d)  (Night, standby, irregular, and hazardous duty differential)
U.S. Office of Personnel Management Title 38 Delegation Agreement with HHS, effective March 6, 2019-June 30, 2022
May 24, 2019 ASA Memo, Modification of HHS Instruction 590-1, Title 38, Physician and Dentist Pay, dated January 1, 2016
May 15, 2019 Acting DAS HR Memo, Revised Title 38 Delegation Agreement, clarifying PDP for podiatrists was not effective April 8, 2019.
OPM FAQs on Hazardous Duty Pay, see discussion under “Who Can Receive Hazardous Duty Pay,” and “Can Title 38 Employees Receive Hazardous Duty Pay”
590-1-40: Definitions
Aggregate Pay. The sum of all payments made to a physician in a calendar year, exclusive of lump sum annual leave, reimbursement of travel, back pay, and severance pay, which may not exceed the amount of annual compensation of the President of the United States specified in section 102 of title 3 of the United States Code (currently set at $400,000).
Annual Pay. The sum of the General Schedule (GS) base pay rate and market pay.  Annual pay is basic pay for purposes of computing civil service retirement benefits, lump sum annual leave payments, life insurance, thrift savings plan, work injury compensation claims, severance pay, recruitment, relocation and retention incentives, continuation of pay, and advances in pay.
Basic Pay. The rate fixed by applicable law or regulation. Basic pay does not include other types of pay such as: bonuses, allowances, overtime, holiday, and military pay or supplemental payments from the Office of Workers' Compensation Programs (OWCP).
Base Pay.  Rate of pay before any applicable locality payment or special rate supplement is added.
Compensation Panel. A group of physicians responsible for the evaluation of physicians and for making recommendations to the approving official for annual pay.
Management Official. A person who has supervisory authority over staff or program management responsibility.
Market Pay. A component of annual pay intended to reflect the recruitment and retention needs for the specialty or assignment of a particular HHS physician.
Tier. A level within the annual pay range for an assignment or specialty.  Refer to Exhibit B of this Instruction for tier levels.
Total Compensation. The sum of all payments made to a physician including base pay, market pay, recruitment, relocation, and retention incentives, overseas allowances (i.e., foreign area COLA under 5 U.S.C. § 5924; post differential under 5 U.S.C. § 5925; and danger pay allowance under 5 U.S.C. § 5928), performance awards, or other cash awards.
590-1-50: Responsibilities
HHS Assistant Secretary for Administration, Office of Human Resources (ASA/OHR):
Develops Department-wide policy and guidance regarding PDP in accordance with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Obtains the concurrence of the Interagency Committee for Health Care Occupations on the HHS PDP Policy when substantial changes are made.
Prepares the annual report of use of PDP as required by OPM.
Maintains an internal review program to monitor use of these provisions.  Provides OPM with program information and access to records upon request.
Periodically reviews Operating Division and Staff Division (OpDiv/StaffDiv) procedures to assure conformance with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
OpDiv/StaffDivs:
Comply with this Instruction, any HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Ensure that merit system principles and the requirements of the Title 38 statute, the OPM-HHS delegation agreement, and this Instruction are followed in their use of PDP.
Delegated authority to approve all Title 38 market pay proposals up to $350,000.
OpDiv and StaffDiv Human Resources Centers (HR Centers):
Comply with this Instruction, and applicable federal laws and regulations.
Maintain auditable program records for 3rd party review.
OpDiv/Ethics Office:
Review requests for approval of outside work activities from physicians for possible conflict of interest with federal work obligations.
Approving Officials:
Comply with this Instruction, any HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Review and certify PDP requests comply with the provisions of law, the OPM and HHS delegation agreement, and this Instruction.
Consult when necessary with OpDiv/StaffDiv OHROs and Ethics Office for employees requesting approval of outside work activities.
590-1-60: Policy
Discretionary Application.  PDP is available for use to recruit and retain highly qualified physicians.  Payment of PDP is optional in each OpDiv.  (Throughout this Instruction, references to OpDiv Heads imply that authorities may be redelegated).
Within budgetary constraints, HHS policy is to compensate physicians at levels reasonably comparable with those paid to other federal sector physicians in the same local area.
Establishment of PDP Amounts.  PDP amounts for physicians will be established on an   individual basis according to GS base pay and market pay.  PDP does not include locality pay under the GS scale.  (See Section Paragraph R of this section, Market Pay, and Exhibit A, which describes approval authorities).
Relationship to Basic Pay.  PDP (annual pay) is basic pay for all benefits including retirement.
Relationship to Premium Pay under Title 5.  Physicians who receive PDP may not:
Be paid overtime for work in excess of 8 hours per day, 40 hours per week, or 80 hours per pay period;
Earn compensatory time off in lieu of overtime pay or compensatory time off for travel; or
Receive any other form of premium pay under 5 U.S.C. chapter 55, e.g., Sunday, holiday, night pays.
Hazardous Duty Pay (HDP).  Physicians at HHS are covered under Chapter 51 (Classification) of Title 5, U.S.C.  As such, physicians receiving PDP are eligible to receive hazardous duty pay.  However, if these employees are later classified under the Title 38 qualification-based grading system, they would not be eligible for HDP.  If approved, HDP is computed based upon the sum of the employee’s GS base pay plus title 38 market pay.
Overseas Allowances.  Physicians who receive market pay are also eligible for certain overseas allowances.  They may be paid:  Foreign area COLA under 5 U.S.C. § 5924; post differential under 5 U.S.C. § 5925; and danger pay allowance under 5 U.S.C. § 5928.  Overseas allowance is computed based upon a percentage of the employee’s GS base pay plus market pay.
Physicians receiving PDP will be covered by the HHS Performance Management Appraisal Program.
Other Discretionary Pay under Title 5.  Physicians who receive PDP may receive other forms of discretionary pay under Title 5, such as awards; and recruitment, relocation, and retention incentives (5 U.S.C. §§ 5753 and 5754).  However, they are not eligible to receive a Physicians’ Comparability Allowance (PCA) under 5 U.S.C. § 5948.  The sum of base pay and any discretionary pay that is paid to a physician under Title 5 authority, (e.g., cash awards, performance awards, recruitment, retention, and relocation incentives) is limited on an annual basis to the rate of pay for Executive Level I (EX-I).
Aggregate Compensation Limits.  Total compensation of physicians receiving PDP under Title 38 authority including, basic pay, market pay, and other supplemental pay under Title 5 cannot exceed the amount of annual pay received by the President of the United States as specified in 3 U.S.C. § 102.  In the event that the amount of compensation does exceed this amount, there will be no deferral of compensation and any excess will be forfeited, unless, specifically permitted by law.
Effective Dates.  PDP will usually be effective at the beginning of the pay period immediately following approval by the approving official or on a later date specified on HHS Form 691 - PDF, “Request for Title 38 Physician, Dentist, and Podiatrist Pay”, located on HHS Intranet Form Page.  PDP may not be approved retroactively; however, depending on the circumstances, an administrative error may be corrected retroactively. (PDP will be paid on a biweekly basis).
Outside Work.  Because of the work obligation associated with PDP, physicians who wish to perform outside work must submit a prior written request under established Department procedures.  Any activity interfering or conflicting with the employee’s federal work obligation will be disapproved.
Part-time Service.  Part-time physicians who have a tour of duty of at least 20 hours per pay period may be offered PDP.  Additionally, physicians who work an intermittent schedule are eligible for PDP.
Relationship to Leave under Title 5.  Physicians who receive PDP continue to be covered by the leave provisions of 5 U.S.C. chapter 63.
Credit Hours.  Physicians who receive PDP are eligible to accrue credit hours in accordance with 5 U.S.C. chapter 61.
Establishment or Changes to Pay.  Management officials proposing PDP must complete HHS Form 691 - PDF and provide:
A copy of the candidate’s/employee’s qualifications statement or curriculum vitae (CV),
The position description,
Written market pay justification,
Copy of medical license,
Copy of Board certification (if applicable), and
External Compensation Surveys.
Information listed in paragraph O above should be forwarded by the proposing official to the compensation panel for review and recommendation to the approving official for a decision.  The decision of the approving official is final.
Once approved, cases will be forwarded with supporting documentation to the servicing HR Center for:
Processing of a Notification of Personnel Action (SF-50); and
Maintenance of records in the employee’s Official Personnel Folder (OPF).  NOTE:  Maintain supporting documentation on the left side of the OPF.
Market Pay
Each physician covered by this part is eligible for market pay.  Market pay is intended to reflect the recruitment and retention needs for the specialty or assignment of a particular physician at an HHS facility.  Physicians who receive Market Pay under 38 U.S.C. § 7431 (c) are no longer entitled to receive any locality payments under 5 U.S.C. § 5304 or special rate supplements under 5 U.S.C. § 5305 or 38 U.S.C. § 7455.  Physicians must have their pay reviewed at least once every 24 months.
At least once every two years, the Veterans Affairs (VA) Secretary prescribes nationwide minimum and maximum amounts of annual pay (base pay plus market pay) that will be paid under this paragraph.  These amounts are published in the Federal Register for not less than 60 days prior to the effective date.  The VA Secretary may prescribe different ranges for different specialties or assignments.  In determining pay ranges, at least two or more national surveys of pay for physicians are consulted.  National surveys consulted include data that describe overall physician income by specialization or assignment and benefits in broad geographic scope.
Pay ranges are located at Exhibit C of this Instruction.  If HHS has a physician, podiatrist, or dentist specialty not covered by one of the pay ranges established by the VA, HHS may (1) cover that specialty under an existing VA pay range or (2) establish a new pay range, consistent with the requirements for establishing pay ranges under 38 U.S.C. § 7431.  HHS will notify OPM and the Interagency Committee for Healthcare Occupations if it adds a new specialty to an existing VA pay range or establishes a new pay range and issue a Federal Register Notice as required by 38 U.S.C. § 7431 (e)(1)(c).
When the VA increases the nationwide minimum and/or maximum amounts of annual pay under this paragraph, physicians are not automatically entitled to a corresponding increase in their individual annual pay rates. Only physicians whose existing rate of annual pay falls below the newly prescribed nationwide minimum for their designated pay range will automatically receive an increase in market pay to make their annual pay rate equivalent to the new nationwide minimum. Compensation Panels review the market pay rates for individual physicians on a periodic basis.
In the event that the nationwide minimum and maximum amounts of annual pay are reduced under this paragraph, physicians already on HHS rolls will not experience a reduction in market pay.
There may be up to four tiers of annual pay for each specialty or assignment for which a separate range of pay has been approved.  Each tier reflects different professional responsibilities, professional achievements, or administrative duties.  See Exhibit B of this Instruction for the different tier levels.
The amount of market pay and appropriate tier for a particular physician is recommended to the approving official.
The determination of the amount of market pay of a particular physician shall take into consideration:
The level of experience of the physician in the specialty or assignment;
The need for the specialty or assignment of the physician at the facility;
The health care labor market for the specialty or assignment of the physician, which may cover any geographic area the OpDiv/StaffDiv considers appropriate for the specialty or assignment;
The board certifications, if any, of the physician;
The accomplishments of the physician in the specialty or assignment; and
Consideration of unique circumstances, qualifications or credentials, if any, and the comparison of these circumstances to the equivalent compensation level of non-HHS physicians in the local health care labor market.
Each OpDiv will establish one Compensation Panel that will be responsible for its PDP Program oversight and guidance.  These panels will ensure that there is consistency and appropriateness of pay determinations within the OpDiv and periodically review pay under the PDP Program.  All Compensation Panel recommendations are taken into consideration by the appropriate approving official.  The approving official determines the amount of market pay to be paid a physician after consideration of the range and tier recommended by the panel.  The approving official’s decision is final.
Exceptions to the Maximum of the Annual Pay Range
General
Except as provided in paragraphs S.1.b through S.1.d, and S.2, below, the annual pay for a physician may not exceed the maximum amount in the nationwide pay range prescribed by the Secretary of the VA for a specialty or assignment.
It is expected that the maximum amount in the nationwide pay range will meet most pay and staffing needs.  However, the OpDiv Head may grant an exception to the maximum on an individual, specialty or assignment, and/or facility-specific basis if such action is necessary to recruit or retain well-qualified physicians.
It is expected that the maximum amount in the nationwide pay range will meet most pay and staffing needs.  However, the OpDiv Head may grant an exception to the maximum on an individual, specialty or assignment, and/or facility-specific basis if such action is necessary to recruit or retain well-qualified physicians.
Exceptions to the maximum amount of a nationwide pay range are not required for physicians who will exceed the pay range due to a GS base increase under 5.U.S.C. 5303, promotion increase under 5334(b), within-grade increase under 5335, or quality-step increase under 5 U.S.C. 5336.  Physicians are not eligible for within-grade increases or quality step increases if their base pay is at the maximum of the GS rate range.
Criteria for Approval.  Each organization submitting a request for an exception to the maximum in the pay range for an individual, specialty or assignment, and/or facility-specific basis must demonstrate that a higher maximum is necessary to maintain adequate staffing.  Factors to consider include:
Exceptions to the Maximum Annual Pay Ranges
Higher Maximum Rates.  There is substantial evidence or anecdotal information that the maximum rates in the community are higher than the Department’s maximum rate for the specialty or assignment.  However, higher rates in the community may not be the sole basis for making a request for an exception to the maximum of the market pay range;
Other Criteria.  The organization may submit any evidence of staffing problems which seriously hamper or have the potential to seriously hamper its ability to recruit and retain physicians in the specialty or assignment.
Individual Exception to the Maximum of the Annual Pay Range
The individual should have outstanding qualifications in a medical or dental specialty or possess a unique combination of education and experience that meets a special need of the organization that may be project specific or critical to the HHS mission.
A discussion of what factors distinguish the individual when compared with other physicians with like length of service, specialty, or assignment; or a discussion of the rare combination of education and experience which the individual has and how it meets a special need of the organization or the mission of HHS.
Requesting Exceptions.  Requests for exceptions to the maximum of the nationwide pay range will be sent to the OpDiv head with a recommendation from the Compensation Panel.  Requests shall include the following:
The individual or specialty or assignment for which the exception is requested;
The amount of maximum pay requested;
The reasons for the request, including documentation specific to the criteria in paragraph S.2 above; and
Any other pertinent information.
590-1-70: Documentation and Accountability
Records, including all documentation sufficient for third party reconstruction purposes, must be retained according to the according to the record disposition schedule.  Generally, records created in a given year must be retained for a total of three (3) full years.
Records involved in litigation and grievance processes may be destroyed only after official notification is received from OPM, Department of Justice, courts, or the Office of the General Counsel, etc. that the matter has been fully litigated, or resolved and closed.
ASA/OHR may conduct periodic accountability reviews to analyze compliance with this Instruction, HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and applicable federal laws and regulations.
Exhibit A:  Delegation Authorities
Authority	Held By	Delegated To
Establish Title 38 Physician, Dentist, and Podiatrist Pay policy and procedures.	ASA	Not Delegated
Approve requests for PDP when proposed annual pay exceeds $350,000.	ASA	Not Delegated
Approve PDP when proposed total compensation exceeds EX-I	ASA	OpDiv Heads
Approve PDP for individuals reporting directly to the OpDiv Head	ASA	OpDiv Heads
Approve exceptions to the maximum of the annual pay range.	ASA	OpDiv Heads
Exhibit B:  OPDIV Physician, Dentist, and Podiatrist Tier Descriptions
OPDIV	COVERAGE: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Tier 1	Staff physician, dentist or podiatrist, nonsupervisory research scientist
Tier 2	Supervisor, Program Manager, Branch Chief, Team Chief or Leader, peer-reviewed Senior Research Scientist having significant impact in the field.
Tier 3	
Second-level supervisor who manages an organizational unit that is subdivided into distinct functional groups (i.e., Division Director).
Director or Deputy Director of a complex group of organizations that have national program responsibilities (i.e., Center or Institute Director or Deputy Director).

OPDIV	COVERAGE: Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
Tier 1	Staff physician, dentist or podiatrist
Tier 2	Supervisor, Program Manager, Division Director, Team Director
Tier 3	
Second-level supervisor managing an organizational unit that is subdivided into distinct functional groups (i.e., Group Director).
Director or Deputy Director of a complex group of organizations that have national program responsibilities (i.e., Center or Office director or deputy).
Chief Physician, Dentist or Deputy Chief Physician or Dentist with responsibility for or direct influence on policies and programs with Agency-wide scope and national impact.

OPDIV	COVERAGE: Food and Drug Administration
Tier 1	Nonsupervisory physician, dentist or podiatrist
Tier 2	First-level supervisor (e.g., Branch Chief and Staff Director) and team leader
Tier 3	
Physician/dentist/podiatrist (Division and Deputy Division Director) with independent resources (personnel, budget, and space).
Second-level supervisor managing an organizational unit that is subdivided into distinct functional groups (i.e., Office level).
Physician/dentist/podiatrist (Office, Deputy Office Director and Center Director) that has responsibility for a complex group or organization that has Agency-wide or nationwide impact.

Exhibit B (con’t):  OPDIV Physician, Dentist, and Podiatrist Tier Descriptions
OPDIV	COVERAGE: Indian Health Service
Tier 1	Staff physician, dentist or podiatrist
Tier 2	First-level supervisor, Clinical Department Head, Clinical Director at outpatient or free-standing clinic.
Tier 3	
Second-level supervisor, Clinical Director of a hospital or medical center
National program responsibilities (normally a headquarters function)

OPDIV	COVERAGE: National Institutes of Health
Tier 1	Nonsupervisory physician, dentist or podiatrist providing patient care services in support of biomedical research.
Tier 2	Supervisory or program manager physician, dentist or podiatrist functions as a fully credentialed, fully trained clinician with patient care responsibilities.
Tier 3	
Physician, dentist or podiatrist with independent resources (personnel, budget, and space) who provides patient-related activities. Publishes and presents original peer-reviewed scientific research at national meetings.
Physician, dentist, or podiatrist with responsibility for a complex group or organization that has Agency-wide or nationwide impact. Growing body of published and presented original peer-reviewed scientific research at national and international meetings. Recognized by receipt of national and international awards.

Exhibit C: Annual Pay Ranges for Physicians, Dentists, and Podiatrist
Authorized by Title 38, U.S.C., §7431
Effective: January 2, 2022

Pay Table 1:  Pay Ranges
Tier Level	Minimum	Maximum
Tier 1	$111,035	$243,000
Tier 2	$110,000	$252,720
Tier 3	$120,000	$280,340
Covered clinical specialties and assignment

Endocrinology; Endodontics; General Practice—Dentistry; Geriatrics; Infectious Diseases; Internal Medicine/Primary Care/Family Practice; Palliative Care; Periodontics; Podiatry (general); Podiatry (surgery-forefoot, rearfoot/ankle, advanced rearfoot/ankle); Preventive Medicine; Prosthodontics; Rheumatology; and all other specialties/assignments not requiring specific specialty training.

Pay Table 2: Pay Ranges
Tier Level	Minimum	Maximum
Tier 1	$111,035	$282,480
Tier 2	$115,000	$306,600
Tier 3	$130,000	$336,000
Covered clinical specialties

Allergy and Immunology; Hospitalist; Nephrology; Neurology; Pathology; Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation/Spinal Cord Injury; and Psychiatry.

Pay Table 3: Pay Ranges
Tier Level	Minimum	Maximum
Tier 1	$111,035	$348,000
Tier 2	$120,000	$365,000
Tier 3	$135,000	$385,000
Covered clinical specialties

Pain management (Interventional and Non-Operating Room Anesthesiology); Cardiology (noninvasive); Emergency Medicine; Gynecology; Hematology-Oncology; Nuclear Medicine; Ophthalmology; Oral Surgery; and Pulmonary.

Exhibit C (con’t):  Annual Pay Ranges for Physicians, Dentists, and Podiatrists
Authorized by Title 38, U.S.C., §7431
Effective: January 2, 2022

Pay Table 4: Pay Ranges
Tier Level	Minimum	Maximum
Tier 1	$111,035	$400,000
Tier 2	$125,000	$400,000
Covered clinical specialties

Anesthesiology; Cardiology (invasive/non-interventional); Cardio-Thoracic Surgery; Critical Care; Dermatology; Dermatology (MOHS); Gastroenterology; General Surgery; Interventional Cardiology; Interventional Radiology; Neurosurgery; Orthopedic Surgery; Otolaryngology; Plastic Surgery; Radiology (diagnostic); Radiation Oncology; Urology; and Vascular Surgery.

Pay Table 5:  Pay Ranges
Tier Level	Minimum	Maximum
Tier 1	$150,000	$350,000
Tier 2	$147,000	$325,000
Tier 3	$145,000	$300,000
Tier 4	$140,000	$285,000
Covered assignments

Chief of Staff and Deputy Chief of Staff.  Depending upon the level of responsibilities, an assignment as chief of staff may be compensated at all three tiers as warranted.  All assignments with a level of responsibilities amounting to deputy chief of staff, however, are compensated at the tier 3 pay range only.

Pay Table 6:  Pay Ranges
Tier Level	Minimum	Maximum
Tier 1	$145,000	$304,750
Tier 2	$145,000	$249,900
Tier 3	$130,000	$235,000
Covered executive assignments

Executive Director; Principal Deputy; Deputy and Assistant Under Secretary for Health; Chief Officer; Chief Consultant; Network Director; Medical Center Director; Chief Medical Officer; National Program Manager; and other Central Office physician, podiatrist or dentist.



















412-1
Instruction 412-1: Training Requirements for Supervisors
412-00: Background
The Office of Personnel Management (“OPM”) recently amended 5 C.F.R. pts. 410 and 412 to implement certain training and development requirements contained in the Federal Workforce Flexibility Act of 2004 (Pub. L. 108-411). That amendment made several significant changes in the law governing the training and development of Federal supervisors. It now mandates that agencies establishes supervisory training programs for new supervisors relating to addressing unacceptable performance, mentoring employees, improving employee performance and productivity, and conducting employee performance appraisals.

412-10: Purpose
This Instruction articulates the Department’s requirements for successful completion of the Mandatory Supervisory Training for those HHS employees holding supervisory positions, including managers and Officers of the Commissioned Corps. Mandatory supervisory training is fundamental to the strategic development of all Agency supervisors. Accordingly, this policy promotes a training policy designed to target the knowledge, skills and abilities that are essential for supervisors to successfully perform their supervisory responsibilities within the Federal Government. The policy also facilitates the supervisor’s continuous professional development and his/her ability to engender the improvement of employee and organizational performance.

412-20: Coverage
All HHS employees who are incumbents of or candidates for supervisory positions in the General Schedule, including those in the Commissioned Corps, or equivalent pay systems also covered by 5 C.F.R. pts. 410 and 412 are governed by this Instruction. Furthermore, this policy applies to employees newly appointed to the Senior Executive Service (“SES”) who are New Supervisors to the Federal Government as well as to employees temporarily assigned or detailed to a supervisory position if that temporary assignment exceeds 90 days. Contract workers are not covered under this Instruction.

412-30: Authorities
5 U.S.C. 7103
5 C.F.R. pts. 410 and 412
48 C.F.R. 31.103-105, 31.107-108
412-40: Definitions
Supervisor means an individual employed by an agency having authority in the interest of the agency to hire, direct, assign, promote, reward, transfer, furlough, layoff, recall, suspend, discipline, or remove employees, to adjust their grievances, or to effectively recommend such action, if the exercise of the authority is not merely routine or clerical in nature but requires the consistent exercise of independent judgment, except that with respect to any unit which includes firefighters or nurses, the term “supervisor” includes only those individuals who devote a preponderance of their employment time to exercising such authority.
Experienced Supervisor means a Federal employee who has served a minimum of one year in a supervisory role within the Federal Government.
New Supervisor- a Federal employee who has served less than 12 months in a supervisory role within the Federal Government.
412-50: Overview of the Mandatory Supervisory Training
All HHS supervisors appointed in December 2009 and thereafter must receive formal training in the required supervisory training content areas. Initial training shall be completed during the first year (i.e., the 12-month probationary period) of appointment to the supervisory position, and refresher training every three years afterwards for as long as the employee remains in a supervisory role.

Pursuant to OPM requirements, HHS’ Mandatory Supervisory Training covers the use of appropriate actions, options, and strategies to: improve employee performance and productivity; identify and assist poor performers; mentor employees; and conduct performance appraisals.

412-60: General Requirements of the Mandatory Supervisory Training
Below are the general requirements specific to each of the three categories of supervisors identifiable within the Agency.  The designation “new supervisor” refers to an employee who has never served in a supervisory capacity.

New Supervisor -A new Supervisor shall complete training as defined in section 412-70 of this Instruction and in compliance to OPM requirements 5 C.F.R. pts. 410 and 412. The number of training hours and any non-HHS training shall be determined by each OpDiv/StaffDiv.
New Supervisor to the Federal Government - A new Supervisor to the Federal Government shall complete an appropriate selection of content areas as defined in 412-70 of this Instruction to acquire a general assimilation into the Federal Government as a Supervisor, including at the OpDiv/StaffDiv’s discretion content that covers Human Resources Management, Acquisition Management/Contracting, Financial Management (Budget Formulation, Execution, and Internal Controls), Grants Management, Congressional Operations, Information Technology Management, Travel Management, Personal Property Management (including Fleet Management), Real Property Management, Records Management, Project Management, Federal Culture, and Coaching. Each OpDiv/StaffDiv shall determine which courses cover and meet the required topic areas.  The training must conform to the requirements of OPM and this Instruction.
Experienced Supervisor - An experienced Supervisor shall complete refresher supervisory training every three years. The training shall be a minimum of 16 hours or its equivalent based on training medium used. Each OpDiv/StaffDiv shall determine refresher training course requirements based on this Instruction, OPM requirements and HHS leadership competencies.
412-70: Required Training Topics for New Mandatory Supervisory Training
The Department's New Mandatory Supervisory Training aims to provide HHS' supervisors with critical information to help them effectively execute core supervisory duties and improve their performance as supervisors. The mandatory supervisory training shall, at a minimum, address objectives to improve supervisors’ knowledge, skills and abilities pertaining to human resource staffing, performance management and appraisal plan, performance management, employee and labor relations, leave administration, HHS enterprise systems, work life quality and employee viewpoint input. A supervisor is required to successfully complete each topic unless a waiver or exemption has been granted by the appropriate official as designated by the OpDiv/StaffDiv.

The required supervisory training does not preclude supervisors from satisfying any other training requirements as mandated by the Department or necessary to achieve HHS’ mission.

412-80: Waivers
Supervisors may seek a full or partial waiver of course(s) by submitting a request for exemption along with supporting documentation to the appropriate official as designated by the OpDiv/StaffDiv. All waiver approvals must be signed by the designee and appropriately documented. Waivers are to be granted only in rare circumstances. All supervisors are still required to successfully complete refresher training requirements at the appropriate time.

412-90: Granting Extensions
Supervisors may seek an extension for completing a mandatory supervisory course by submitting a request and supporting documentation to the appropriate official as designated by the OpDiv/StaffDiv. A new supervisor seeking an extension because of an unforeseen event, s/he must complete the courses for which additional time was granted within a 120 days of the extension. All extensions must be in writing and specify a deadline by which the training shall be completed.

412-100: Compliance
Each OPDIV is charged with ensuring that its supervisory employees are in compliance with this Instruction. Although the OpDiv/StaffDiv may establish its own internal control measures for compliance, the system that it implements shall include a method for assuring proper documentation of the courses that were successfully completed within the Department’s Learning Management System. An employee who has not met the mandatory training requirements within the allowed time periods may be disciplined in a manner consistent with the policies of the OpDiv/StaffDiv.













920-1
Human Resources Manual
HHS Instruction 920-1
Issue Date:   March 18, 2008


Material Deleted:

HHS Instruction 920-1, Executive Resources Management, dated June 5, 1996

Background:

With the elimination of this Instruction, all required policies, procedures, approval authorities and documentation requirements must be followed as specified in applicable references as identified below:  

A.	5 U.S.C. 3104 (employment of specially qualified scientific and professional personnel)
B.	5 U.S.C. Chapter 31, Subchapter II (the Senior Executive Service)
C.	5 U.S.C. 3324 (appointments to positions classified above GS-15)
D.	5 U.S.C. 3325 (appointments to scientific and professional positions)
E.	5 U.S.C. Chapter 33, Subchapter VIII (appointment, reassignment, transfer, and development in the SES)
F.	5 U.S.C. Chapter 35, Subchapter V (removal, reinstatement, and guaranteed placement in the SES
G.	5 U.S.C. Chapter 43, Subchapter II (performance appraisal in the SES)
H.	5 U.S.C. 4507 (awarding of ranks in the SES)
I.	5 U.S.C. 5307 (limitations on certain payments)
J.	5 U.S.C. Chapter 53, Subchapter VIII (pay for the SES)
K.	42 U.S.C. 228 (Senior Biomedical Research Service)
L.	5 CFR 213.3202(m) (appointment authority for placements under 5 U.S.C. 3594(b))
M.	5 CFR Part 214 (the Senior Executive Service)
N.	5 CFR Part 317 (employment in the SES)
O.	5 CFR Part 319 (employment in senior level and scientific and professional positions)
P.	5 CFR Part 359 (removal from SES; guaranteed placement in other personnel systems.
Q.	5 CFR Part 412 (executive and management development)
R.	5 CFR Part 430, Subpart E (performance appraisal for the SES)
S.	5 CFR Part 451 (incentive awards)
T.	5 CFR Part 530, Subpart B (aggregate limitations on pay)
U.	CFR Part 534, Subpart C (pay for senior level and scientific and professional positions)
V.	5 CFR Part 534, Subpart D (pay and performance awards under the SES)
W.	42 CFR Part 24 (Senior Biomedical Research Service)
 
X.	Memo from the Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management to Heads of OPDIVs and STAFFDIVs, dated June 29, 2007, Subject:  Strengthening Strategic Management of Executive Resources—Interim Guidelines
Y.	Senior Executive Service and Organizational Performance Management System (July 2007)




	Antonia T. Harris
	Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources,
	Assistant Secretary for Administration and
	     Management

















920-2

Material Transmitted

HHS Instruction 920-1, Executive Resources Management (pages -4)
HHS Exhibit 920-1-A, Delegations of Authority for Executive Resources Management (pages 1-2)
HHS Instruction 920-2, The Senior Executive Service: Reduction in Force and Furlough (pages 1-3)
HHS Exhibit 920-2-A, Format for Recording Competitive Performance Standing (page 1)

Material Superseded

The following Instructions (and their Exhibits) are superseded entirely:

Instruction 920-2, Executive Resource Boards (3/88)
Instruction 920-3, SES Performance Review Boards and Performance Awards (Bonuses) (3/88)
Instruction 920-4, Pay in the SES (6/83)
Instruction 920-5, Presidential Executive Rank Awards (3/88)
Instruction 920-6, Removal, Reinstatement, and Guaranteed Placement in the SES (1/84)
Instruction 920-7, Reduction in Force in the SES (3/95)
Instruction 920-8, Furloughs in the SES (3/95)
Instruction 920-9, Controls on SES and Equivalent Non-SES Positions (8/83)
Instruction 920-10, SES Career Merit Staffing Plan (8/84)
Instruction 920-11, Executive Succession Program (10/89)

Background

In September 1995, the Secretary directed the delegation of most executive resource authorities to Heads of Operating Divisions (OPDIVs). The continued exercise of these authorities by an OPDIV is contingent on the successful implementation of an executive resource management plan. These delegations have rendered obsolete the greater part of the Department's personnel instructions in the 920 series. Accordingly, with this transmittal we are abolishing all ten of these instructions and are replacing them with just two new ones.

The first, a new 920-1, covers the broad area of executive resources management in the Department. It restates the delegations and plan requirements mentioned above, so that these will be together with the few Departmental policies and requirements that are still appropriate. The coverage of this Instruction is primarily the Senior Executive Service, but some provisions also refer to equivalent executive positions.

 

The second new instruction, 920-2, covers the topics of reduction in force and furlough in the SES.  It updates two instructions issued a year ago, addressing the need for certain Departmentwide controls in the context of a decentralized program. Its exhibit is the format for recording competitive performance standing in the event of a reduction in force.

Filing Instructions

File new material.  Change Table of Contents (Instruction 002-1) for the Personnel Manual to reflect changes. Post receipt of this Transmittal to the HHS Check List of Transmittals and file it in sequential order after the Check List.







							John J. Callahan
							Assistant Secretary for
							Management and Budget














INSTRUCTIONS 920-1, 920-2







Distribution:  MS (PERS) :  HRFC-001

 

HHS PERSONNEL INSTRUCTION 920-1

Subject: EXECUTIVE RESOURCES MANAGEMENT

	920-1-10	Purpose
		 20	Coverage
		 30	References
		 40	Executive Resources Planning
		 50	Executive Resources Boards (ERBs) and Merit Staffing
		 60	Performance Review Boards (PRBs)
		 70	Executive Resource Allocations
		 80	Program Information and Accountability

Exhibit 920- 1-A   Delegations of Authority for Executive Resources Management

920-1-10 PURPOSE

This Instruction provides delegations of authority, requirements, and guidance for the management of executive resources in the Department.

920-1-20 COVERAGE

This Instruction applies primarily to the Senior Executive Service. However, in order to achieve a comprehensive approach to managing executive resources, some provisions also apply to Senior Level (SL) Scientific and Professional (ST) and Senior Biomedical Research Service (SBRS) positions. (Note that there are departmental regulations covering the SBRS at 42 CFR Part 24).

902-1-30 REFERENCES

A.	5 U.S.C. 3104 (employment of specially qualified scientific and professional 	personnel)
B.	5 U.S.C. Chapter 31, Subchapter II (the Senior Executive Service)
C.	5 U.S.C. 3324 (appointments to positions classified above GS-15)
D.	5 U.S.C. 3325 (appointments to scientific and professional positions)
E.	5 U.S.C. Chapter 33, Subchapter VIII (appointment, reassignment, transfer, and 	development in the SES)
F.	5 U.S.C. Chapter 35, Subchapter V (removal, reinstatement, and guaranteed 	placement in the SES
G.	5 U.S.C. Chapter 43, Subchapter II (performance appraisal in the SES)
H.	5 U.S.C. 4507 (awarding of ranks in the SES)
 

(290-1-30 continued) .

I.	5 U.S.C. 5307 (limitations on certain payments)
J.	5 U.S.C. Chapter 53, Subchapter VIII (pay for the SES)
K.	42 U.S.C. 228 (Senior Biomedical Research Service)
L.	5 CFR 213.3202(m) (appointment authority for placements under 5 U.S.C. 	3594(b))
M.	5 CFR Part 214 (the Senior Executive Service)
N.	5 CFR Part 317 (employment in the SES)
O.	5 CFR Part 319(employment in senior level and scientific and professional 	positions)
P.	5 CFR Part 359 (removal from SES; guaranteed placement in other personnel 	systems.
Q.	5 CFR Part 412 (executive and management development)
R.	5 CFR Part 430, Subpart E (performance appraisal for the SES)
S.	5 CFR Part 451 (incentive awards)
T.	5 CFR Part 530, Subpart B (aggregate limitations on pay)
U.	CFR Part 534, Subpart C (pay for senior level and scientific and professional 	positions)
V.	5 CFR Part 534, Subpart D (pay and performance awards under the SES)
W.	42 CFR Part 24 (SBRS)
X.	HHS Personnel Instruction 351-1 (reduction in force)
Y.	HHS Personnel Instruction 412-1 (executive development)
Z.	HHS Personnel Instruction 430-6 (SES performance appraisal)
AA.	HHS Personnel Instruction 920-2 (RIF and furlough in the SES)

920-1-40  EXECUTIVE RESOURCE PLANNING

Each OPDIV is required to prepare, for the Secretary's approval, a performance-based executive resource management plan that reflects OPDIV implementation of delegated authorities. The plan must include the following:

•	identification of "key positions" (positions critical to the achievement of mission objectives; selections for these positions require the Secretary's concurrence)
•	states desired outcomes in terms of program improvements, including progress towards meeting affirmative action plan requirements.
•	describes the process to be used for succession planning
•	describes planned monitoring and reporting activities in such areas as pay distribution, executive development and mobility, and executive workforce demographics
•	outlines intended redelegation of executive resource management authorities
•	for OPDIVS with multiple pay authorities -- describes how the various pay plans, together with the use of special pay authorities, allowances, and bonuses will be integrated (or complement each other) in achieving mission objectives.
 
920-1-50 EXECUTIVE RESOURCE BOARDS (ERBs)

Each OPDIV must establish at least one ERB (except that the Administration on Aging is included in the Office of the Secretary ERB). Each ERB must reflect diverse membership and must consist of three or more SES or equivalent members.

Each OPDIV must establish an SES merit staffing system that meets the OPM requirements in 5 CFR 317.501 and Departmental policies. The ERB shall conduct the merit staffing process for initial SES career appointment. The OPDIV Head may assign other executive resource management duties to the ERB.

920-1-60 PERFORMANCE REVIEW BOARDS (PRBs)

Each OPDIV must establish at least one PRB consisting of three or more SES or equivalent members. The PRB is responsible for making recommendations on the performance of senior executives in the OPDIV in accordance with the requirements in 5. CFR 430.307 and  any Departmental policies. The OPDIV Head may assign other related duties to the PRB.

920-1-70 EXECUTIVE RESOURCE ALLOCATIONS

The Secretary retains authority to allocate executive position authorizations (i.e., slots) among the OPDIVs. Each Department must make a biennial report to OPM requesting allocations for SES and SES-equivalent (SL, ST) slots. The OHR will provide preparation instructions to the OPDIVs for this report and for other allocation reviews that might be required.

For limited appointments (i.e., limited term and limited emergency), the OPM provides HHS with slot authority equal to two per cent of our overall SES allocation. The OHR monitors the use of this pool. Each OPDIV may make limited appointments in a number equal to two percent of its own allocation, as long as the appointee is currently a career or career-type employee outside the SES. If an OPDIV needs additional limited appointment slots, it should request such from the ASMB.

920-1-80 PROGRAM INFORMATION AND ACCOUNTABILITY

Each OPDIV must continually monitor its executive resources management program to ensure that it supports mission accomplishment by effectively attracting, retaining, compensating, recognizing, and diversifying its executive cadre.

By November 1 each year, the Head of each OPDIV will submit a self-assessment report to the Secretary, through the ASMB, to indicate accomplishments under the specific performance measures contained in its executive resources management plan (see 920-1-40, 
(920-1-80 continued)

above). Changes from baseline data that have resulted from the exercise of delegated executive resources management authorities (for such things as how long it takes to fill vacancies, changes in pay-level alignment, executive development activities, demographic changes, and other measures devised by the OPDIV) should be provided to illustrate progress. OPDIV ERBs should oversee the development of these reports and should be engaged, on an on-going basis, in assessing the degree to which its executive resources management program contributes to overall mission accomplishment. 

ASMB will analyze the annual OPDIV reports and recommend to the Secretary's ERB whether authorities delegated to each OPDIV should be continued, curtailed, or otherwise modified. ASMB will also identify, and disseminate to others, strategies found to be especially successful.

Overall guidance on program assessment may be found in Instruction 273-1.  OHR will provide guidance and technical assistance for the assessment of compliance and personnel process effectiveness.
 

DELEGATIONS OF AUTHORITY FOR EXECUTIVE RESOURCES MANAGEMENT

In September 1995, most executive resources authorities were delegated to the Heads of OPDIVs. The paragraphs below reflect the resulting status of authorities.

The following authorities are retained by the Secretary:

•	allocation of all slots, for SES, SBRS, SL, and ST, among the OPDIVs
•	establishment of overall bonus pools, within which individual bonus decisions will be made
•	approval of all noncareer executive personnel actions
•	nominations of executives for Presidential rank awards
•	approval of the career appointments of current or former noncareer appointees
•	approval of Assistant Surgeon General appointments and promotions
•	approval of SBRS pay above Executive Level II
•	concurrence with selections for key executive positions
•	concurrence with selections for executive resource board (ERB) membership

The following authorities are delegated to Heads of OPDIVs, with authority to redelegate:

•	establishment and abolishment of SES positions; administrative changes to position descriptions
•	recommend approval of selectee's managerial qualifications to the U.S. Office of Personnel Management
•	SES career appointments (with Secretarial concurrence for key positions)
•	reinstatements into the SES
•	transfers and reassignments
•	details to and from executive-level positions
•	recertification determinations
•	adverse actions
•	initial pay setting and pay adjustments
•	performance bonuses (within established pool amounts) and special act cash awards
•	recruitment and relocation bonuses and retention allowances
•	sabbaticals and Intergovernmental Personnel Act assignments
•	alternative work schedules (and flexiplace arrangements)
•	overall management of position establishment and personnel actions for SL, ST, and SBRS (Secretarial approval required for SBRS pay above Executive Level II)
•	approval of appointment of non-flag Commissioned Officers into SES equivalent positions.

(continued on next page)


These delegations must be exercised in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, and policies of the U.S. Office of Personnel Management and the Department. Any redelegations must be in writing.
 

HHS PERSONNEL INSTRUCTION 920-2

Subject: SENIOR EXECUTIVE SERVICE: REDUCTION IN FORCE (Section I) and
					           FURLOUGH (Section II)

PURP OSE

The purpose of this Instruction is to establish policies and procedures relating to the reduction in force and furlough of members of the Senior Executive Service.

REFERENCES -

A.	5 U.S.C. 3595 (reduction if force (RIF) in the SES)
B.	5 U.S.C. 3595a (furlough in the SES)
C.	5 CFR 359 Subpart F (RIF in the SES)
D.	5 CFR 359 Subpart G (guaranteed placement)
E.	5 CFR 359 Subpart H (furlough in the SES)

SECTION I - REDUCTION IN FORCE

COVERAGE

This section applies to all SES career appointees. Non-career, limited term, and limited emergency SES appointees may be removed without regard to this Instruction.

POLICY

In a RIF, the objective will be to avoid the separation of affected career members by placing them in positions for which they qualify.

PLACEMENT PROCESS

OPDIV Heads have primary responsibility for identifying placement opportunities for any affected executives from their OPDIV. Placement efforts should include consideration of every reassignment option available regardless of geographic location and any emerging needs for SES positions.

If placement efforts within the OPDIV fail, the Assistant Secretary for Management and Budget (ASMB) will conduct Department-wide placement efforts. SES slot allocations may be adjusted to support placements across OPDIV lines. 
 

COMPETITIVE RIF PROCEDURES

If the placement of one or more executives in a vacant position is not possible, ASMB will
apply competitive RIF procedures.

To implement competitive RIF procedures, each OPDIV will compute, and forward to ASMB, the Competitive Performance Standing (CPS) for each of its career SES members, including those on IPA assignments or on detail. The CPS will be computed on the basis of official records reflecting individual performance recognition. Point values will be assigned in accordance with the table in Exhibit 920-2-A. Length of service, as indicated in the exhibit, is used for tie-breaking. Executives serving an SES probationary period who have not received a performance rating will be accorded a rating of "fully satisfactory. "

ASMB will conduct the process of consolidation. SES employees will be identified for release from their positions on the basis of their CPS, beginning with those having the lowest numeric total. ASMB, in consultation with the OPDIV as to required qualifications, will " determine positions for which the affected executive is qualified and which are encumbered by executives with lower CPS. If there are no such positions, the executive has exhausted placement opportunities within the Department. If more than one such position exists, the determination as to which executive will be released from his/her position will be based on the CPS totals. Ties will be broken on the basis of length of career service in the SES andequivalent level Federal civilian positions. However, appointees who have completed theSES probationary period must be retained over an appointee who has not if they both havethe same retention standing. If a tie still exists, it will be broken on the basis of length of total Federal civilian service. The placement process will then begin for the newly identified displacee (with the possibility that not found).

OPM PRIORITY PLACEMENT

For career executives who cannot the competitive process may be invoked if a placement is be placed within the Department (through placement or competitive RIF process), the Department will request the Office of Personnel Management to place the executive in another Federal agency. If OPM is unable to effect placement, the cognizant OPDIV will issue the necessary RIF notice.

PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS

Notice requirements, appeals, records, transfer of function entitlements, and placement rights are as stated in 5 CFR 359, Subparts F and G.

 
SECTION II - FURLOUGH

COVERAGE

This section applies to career members of the SES, including those seining a probationary period. Furloughs of career members who are reemployed annuitants, non-career, limited term, and limited emergency SES appointees may be effected without regard to this Instruction.

POLICY

The furlough of an SES member will be made only when the OPDIV intends to bring the member back to work and pay status within one year. A furlough may not extend more than one year. The competitive areas and personnel office responsibilities that apply to non-SES reductions in force will apply to the furlough activity affecting any SES member.

SHORT FURLOUGHS

For furloughs of career appointees of 30 calendar days or less (or for 22 work days if the furlough does not cover consecutive days), the procedures that apply to furloughs of non-SES employees who are covered by 5 CFR 752, Subpart D will be followed.

LONG FURLOUGHS

For furloughs of over "30 calendar days, the competitive procedures that apply to the RIF of SES members will be followed. See Section I of this Instruction.

 

Format for Recording Competitive Performance Standing
________________________________________________________________________

Name: ____________________________________________________________

Organization: _______________________________________________________

										          POINTS
I. Presidential Rank Award
•	points credited for 5-year period of award)
	Distinguished granted FY    (60 points)					______
	Meritorious, granted FY    (40 points)					______

II. Performance Award (Bonus)
•	points credited for three most recent performance periods:
bonus of 11% or higher = 20; 8-10% = 18;
6-7% = 15; 5% = 12 points)
       FY_________  Rating ________			______
       FY_________  Rating ________			______
       FY_________  Rating ________			______

III. Performance Rating
•	points credited for three most recent performance periods:
Fully Successful or higher = 4 points,
Minimally Satisfactory = 1 point, Unsatisfactory = 0 points
        FY________  Rating ________ 			______
        FY________  Rating ________ 			______
        FY________  Rating ________ 			______

									TOTAL:	______
________________________________________________________________________

Service Length (for tie breaking only) 		Years   	Months	Days

SES and equivalent* civilian Federal service:		______	______	______
Total Federal service, including SES and equivalent:	______	______	______

________________________________________________________________________

Information recorded by:_____________________________	Date ______________
*	includes Executive Level, SL, ST, SBRS, and "supergrade"


















OHR-05-2019

Material Transmitted

HHS Instruction 920-1, Executive Resources Management (pages -4)
HHS Exhibit 920-1-A, Delegations of Authority for Executive Resources Management (pages 1-2)
HHS Instruction 920-2, The Senior Executive Service: Reduction in Force and Furlough (pages 1-3)
HHS Exhibit 920-2-A, Format for Recording Competitive Performance Standing (page 1)

Material Superseded

The following Instructions (and their Exhibits) are superseded entirely:

Instruction 920-2, Executive Resource Boards (3/88)
Instruction 920-3, SES Performance Review Boards and Performance Awards (Bonuses) (3/88)
Instruction 920-4, Pay in the SES (6/83)
Instruction 920-5, Presidential Executive Rank Awards (3/88)
Instruction 920-6, Removal, Reinstatement, and Guaranteed Placement in the SES (1/84)
Instruction 920-7, Reduction in Force in the SES (3/95)
Instruction 920-8, Furloughs in the SES (3/95)
Instruction 920-9, Controls on SES and Equivalent Non-SES Positions (8/83)
Instruction 920-10, SES Career Merit Staffing Plan (8/84)
Instruction 920-11, Executive Succession Program (10/89)

Background

In September 1995, the Secretary directed the delegation of most executive resource authorities to Heads of Operating Divisions (OPDIVs). The continued exercise of these authorities by an OPDIV is contingent on the successful implementation of an executive resource management plan. These delegations have rendered obsolete the greater part of the Department's personnel instructions in the 920 series. Accordingly, with this transmittal we are abolishing all ten of these instructions and are replacing them with just two new ones.

The first, a new 920-1, covers the broad area of executive resources management in the Department. It restates the delegations and plan requirements mentioned above, so that these will be together with the few Departmental policies and requirements that are still appropriate. The coverage of this Instruction is primarily the Senior Executive Service, but some provisions also refer to equivalent executive positions.

 

The second new instruction, 920-2, covers the topics of reduction in force and furlough in the SES.  It updates two instructions issued a year ago, addressing the need for certain Departmentwide controls in the context of a decentralized program. Its exhibit is the format for recording competitive performance standing in the event of a reduction in force.

Filing Instructions

File new material.  Change Table of Contents (Instruction 002-1) for the Personnel Manual to reflect changes. Post receipt of this Transmittal to the HHS Check List of Transmittals and file it in sequential order after the Check List.







							John J. Callahan
							Assistant Secretary for
							Management and Budget














INSTRUCTIONS 920-1, 920-2







Distribution:  MS (PERS) :  HRFC-001

 

HHS PERSONNEL INSTRUCTION 920-1

Subject: EXECUTIVE RESOURCES MANAGEMENT

	920-1-10	Purpose
		 20	Coverage
		 30	References
		 40	Executive Resources Planning
		 50	Executive Resources Boards (ERBs) and Merit Staffing
		 60	Performance Review Boards (PRBs)
		 70	Executive Resource Allocations
		 80	Program Information and Accountability

Exhibit 920- 1-A   Delegations of Authority for Executive Resources Management

920-1-10 PURPOSE

This Instruction provides delegations of authority, requirements, and guidance for the management of executive resources in the Department.

920-1-20 COVERAGE

This Instruction applies primarily to the Senior Executive Service. However, in order to achieve a comprehensive approach to managing executive resources, some provisions also apply to Senior Level (SL) Scientific and Professional (ST) and Senior Biomedical Research Service (SBRS) positions. (Note that there are departmental regulations covering the SBRS at 42 CFR Part 24).

902-1-30 REFERENCES

A.	5 U.S.C. 3104 (employment of specially qualified scientific and professional 	personnel)
B.	5 U.S.C. Chapter 31, Subchapter II (the Senior Executive Service)
C.	5 U.S.C. 3324 (appointments to positions classified above GS-15)
D.	5 U.S.C. 3325 (appointments to scientific and professional positions)
E.	5 U.S.C. Chapter 33, Subchapter VIII (appointment, reassignment, transfer, and 	development in the SES)
F.	5 U.S.C. Chapter 35, Subchapter V (removal, reinstatement, and guaranteed 	placement in the SES
G.	5 U.S.C. Chapter 43, Subchapter II (performance appraisal in the SES)
H.	5 U.S.C. 4507 (awarding of ranks in the SES)
 

(290-1-30 continued) .

I.	5 U.S.C. 5307 (limitations on certain payments)
J.	5 U.S.C. Chapter 53, Subchapter VIII (pay for the SES)
K.	42 U.S.C. 228 (Senior Biomedical Research Service)
L.	5 CFR 213.3202(m) (appointment authority for placements under 5 U.S.C. 	3594(b))
M.	5 CFR Part 214 (the Senior Executive Service)
N.	5 CFR Part 317 (employment in the SES)
O.	5 CFR Part 319(employment in senior level and scientific and professional 	positions)
P.	5 CFR Part 359 (removal from SES; guaranteed placement in other personnel 	systems.
Q.	5 CFR Part 412 (executive and management development)
R.	5 CFR Part 430, Subpart E (performance appraisal for the SES)
S.	5 CFR Part 451 (incentive awards)
T.	5 CFR Part 530, Subpart B (aggregate limitations on pay)
U.	CFR Part 534, Subpart C (pay for senior level and scientific and professional 	positions)
V.	5 CFR Part 534, Subpart D (pay and performance awards under the SES)
W.	42 CFR Part 24 (SBRS)
X.	HHS Personnel Instruction 351-1 (reduction in force)
Y.	HHS Personnel Instruction 412-1 (executive development)
Z.	HHS Personnel Instruction 430-6 (SES performance appraisal)
AA.	HHS Personnel Instruction 920-2 (RIF and furlough in the SES)

920-1-40  EXECUTIVE RESOURCE PLANNING

Each OPDIV is required to prepare, for the Secretary's approval, a performance-based executive resource management plan that reflects OPDIV implementation of delegated authorities. The plan must include the following:

•	identification of "key positions" (positions critical to the achievement of mission objectives; selections for these positions require the Secretary's concurrence)
•	states desired outcomes in terms of program improvements, including progress towards meeting affirmative action plan requirements.
•	describes the process to be used for succession planning
•	describes planned monitoring and reporting activities in such areas as pay distribution, executive development and mobility, and executive workforce demographics
•	outlines intended redelegation of executive resource management authorities
•	for OPDIVS with multiple pay authorities -- describes how the various pay plans, together with the use of special pay authorities, allowances, and bonuses will be integrated (or complement each other) in achieving mission objectives.
 
920-1-50 EXECUTIVE RESOURCE BOARDS (ERBs)

Each OPDIV must establish at least one ERB (except that the Administration on Aging is included in the Office of the Secretary ERB). Each ERB must reflect diverse membership and must consist of three or more SES or equivalent members.

Each OPDIV must establish an SES merit staffing system that meets the OPM requirements in 5 CFR 317.501 and Departmental policies. The ERB shall conduct the merit staffing process for initial SES career appointment. The OPDIV Head may assign other executive resource management duties to the ERB.

920-1-60 PERFORMANCE REVIEW BOARDS (PRBs)

Each OPDIV must establish at least one PRB consisting of three or more SES or equivalent members. The PRB is responsible for making recommendations on the performance of senior executives in the OPDIV in accordance with the requirements in 5. CFR 430.307 and  any Departmental policies. The OPDIV Head may assign other related duties to the PRB.

920-1-70 EXECUTIVE RESOURCE ALLOCATIONS

The Secretary retains authority to allocate executive position authorizations (i.e., slots) among the OPDIVs. Each Department must make a biennial report to OPM requesting allocations for SES and SES-equivalent (SL, ST) slots. The OHR will provide preparation instructions to the OPDIVs for this report and for other allocation reviews that might be required.

For limited appointments (i.e., limited term and limited emergency), the OPM provides HHS with slot authority equal to two per cent of our overall SES allocation. The OHR monitors the use of this pool. Each OPDIV may make limited appointments in a number equal to two percent of its own allocation, as long as the appointee is currently a career or career-type employee outside the SES. If an OPDIV needs additional limited appointment slots, it should request such from the ASMB.

920-1-80 PROGRAM INFORMATION AND ACCOUNTABILITY

Each OPDIV must continually monitor its executive resources management program to ensure that it supports mission accomplishment by effectively attracting, retaining, compensating, recognizing, and diversifying its executive cadre.

By November 1 each year, the Head of each OPDIV will submit a self-assessment report to the Secretary, through the ASMB, to indicate accomplishments under the specific performance measures contained in its executive resources management plan (see 920-1-40, 
(920-1-80 continued)

above). Changes from baseline data that have resulted from the exercise of delegated executive resources management authorities (for such things as how long it takes to fill vacancies, changes in pay-level alignment, executive development activities, demographic changes, and other measures devised by the OPDIV) should be provided to illustrate progress. OPDIV ERBs should oversee the development of these reports and should be engaged, on an on-going basis, in assessing the degree to which its executive resources management program contributes to overall mission accomplishment. 

ASMB will analyze the annual OPDIV reports and recommend to the Secretary's ERB whether authorities delegated to each OPDIV should be continued, curtailed, or otherwise modified. ASMB will also identify, and disseminate to others, strategies found to be especially successful.

Overall guidance on program assessment may be found in Instruction 273-1.  OHR will provide guidance and technical assistance for the assessment of compliance and personnel process effectiveness.
 

DELEGATIONS OF AUTHORITY FOR EXECUTIVE RESOURCES MANAGEMENT

In September 1995, most executive resources authorities were delegated to the Heads of OPDIVs. The paragraphs below reflect the resulting status of authorities.

The following authorities are retained by the Secretary:

•	allocation of all slots, for SES, SBRS, SL, and ST, among the OPDIVs
•	establishment of overall bonus pools, within which individual bonus decisions will be made
•	approval of all noncareer executive personnel actions
•	nominations of executives for Presidential rank awards
•	approval of the career appointments of current or former noncareer appointees
•	approval of Assistant Surgeon General appointments and promotions
•	approval of SBRS pay above Executive Level II
•	concurrence with selections for key executive positions
•	concurrence with selections for executive resource board (ERB) membership

The following authorities are delegated to Heads of OPDIVs, with authority to redelegate:

•	establishment and abolishment of SES positions; administrative changes to position descriptions
•	recommend approval of selectee's managerial qualifications to the U.S. Office of Personnel Management
•	SES career appointments (with Secretarial concurrence for key positions)
•	reinstatements into the SES
•	transfers and reassignments
•	details to and from executive-level positions
•	recertification determinations
•	adverse actions
•	initial pay setting and pay adjustments
•	performance bonuses (within established pool amounts) and special act cash awards
•	recruitment and relocation bonuses and retention allowances
•	sabbaticals and Intergovernmental Personnel Act assignments
•	alternative work schedules (and flexiplace arrangements)
•	overall management of position establishment and personnel actions for SL, ST, and SBRS (Secretarial approval required for SBRS pay above Executive Level II)
•	approval of appointment of non-flag Commissioned Officers into SES equivalent positions.

(continued on next page)


These delegations must be exercised in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, and policies of the U.S. Office of Personnel Management and the Department. Any redelegations must be in writing.
 

HHS PERSONNEL INSTRUCTION 920-2

Subject: SENIOR EXECUTIVE SERVICE: REDUCTION IN FORCE (Section I) and
					           FURLOUGH (Section II)

PURP OSE

The purpose of this Instruction is to establish policies and procedures relating to the reduction in force and furlough of members of the Senior Executive Service.

REFERENCES -

A.	5 U.S.C. 3595 (reduction if force (RIF) in the SES)
B.	5 U.S.C. 3595a (furlough in the SES)
C.	5 CFR 359 Subpart F (RIF in the SES)
D.	5 CFR 359 Subpart G (guaranteed placement)
E.	5 CFR 359 Subpart H (furlough in the SES)

SECTION I - REDUCTION IN FORCE

COVERAGE

This section applies to all SES career appointees. Non-career, limited term, and limited emergency SES appointees may be removed without regard to this Instruction.

POLICY

In a RIF, the objective will be to avoid the separation of affected career members by placing them in positions for which they qualify.

PLACEMENT PROCESS

OPDIV Heads have primary responsibility for identifying placement opportunities for any affected executives from their OPDIV. Placement efforts should include consideration of every reassignment option available regardless of geographic location and any emerging needs for SES positions.

If placement efforts within the OPDIV fail, the Assistant Secretary for Management and Budget (ASMB) will conduct Department-wide placement efforts. SES slot allocations may be adjusted to support placements across OPDIV lines. 
 

COMPETITIVE RIF PROCEDURES

If the placement of one or more executives in a vacant position is not possible, ASMB will
apply competitive RIF procedures.

To implement competitive RIF procedures, each OPDIV will compute, and forward to ASMB, the Competitive Performance Standing (CPS) for each of its career SES members, including those on IPA assignments or on detail. The CPS will be computed on the basis of official records reflecting individual performance recognition. Point values will be assigned in accordance with the table in Exhibit 920-2-A. Length of service, as indicated in the exhibit, is used for tie-breaking. Executives serving an SES probationary period who have not received a performance rating will be accorded a rating of "fully satisfactory. "

ASMB will conduct the process of consolidation. SES employees will be identified for release from their positions on the basis of their CPS, beginning with those having the lowest numeric total. ASMB, in consultation with the OPDIV as to required qualifications, will " determine positions for which the affected executive is qualified and which are encumbered by executives with lower CPS. If there are no such positions, the executive has exhausted placement opportunities within the Department. If more than one such position exists, the determination as to which executive will be released from his/her position will be based on the CPS totals. Ties will be broken on the basis of length of career service in the SES andequivalent level Federal civilian positions. However, appointees who have completed theSES probationary period must be retained over an appointee who has not if they both havethe same retention standing. If a tie still exists, it will be broken on the basis of length of total Federal civilian service. The placement process will then begin for the newly identified displacee (with the possibility that not found).

OPM PRIORITY PLACEMENT

For career executives who cannot the competitive process may be invoked if a placement is be placed within the Department (through placement or competitive RIF process), the Department will request the Office of Personnel Management to place the executive in another Federal agency. If OPM is unable to effect placement, the cognizant OPDIV will issue the necessary RIF notice.

PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS

Notice requirements, appeals, records, transfer of function entitlements, and placement rights are as stated in 5 CFR 359, Subparts F and G.

 
SECTION II - FURLOUGH

COVERAGE

This section applies to career members of the SES, including those seining a probationary period. Furloughs of career members who are reemployed annuitants, non-career, limited term, and limited emergency SES appointees may be effected without regard to this Instruction.

POLICY

The furlough of an SES member will be made only when the OPDIV intends to bring the member back to work and pay status within one year. A furlough may not extend more than one year. The competitive areas and personnel office responsibilities that apply to non-SES reductions in force will apply to the furlough activity affecting any SES member.

SHORT FURLOUGHS

For furloughs of career appointees of 30 calendar days or less (or for 22 work days if the furlough does not cover consecutive days), the procedures that apply to furloughs of non-SES employees who are covered by 5 CFR 752, Subpart D will be followed.

LONG FURLOUGHS

For furloughs of over "30 calendar days, the competitive procedures that apply to the RIF of SES members will be followed. See Section I of this Instruction.

 

Format for Recording Competitive Performance Standing
________________________________________________________________________

Name: ____________________________________________________________

Organization: _______________________________________________________

										          POINTS
I. Presidential Rank Award
•	points credited for 5-year period of award)
	Distinguished granted FY    (60 points)					______
	Meritorious, granted FY    (40 points)					______

II. Performance Award (Bonus)
•	points credited for three most recent performance periods:
bonus of 11% or higher = 20; 8-10% = 18;
6-7% = 15; 5% = 12 points)
       FY_________  Rating ________			______
       FY_________  Rating ________			______
       FY_________  Rating ________			______

III. Performance Rating
•	points credited for three most recent performance periods:
Fully Successful or higher = 4 points,
Minimally Satisfactory = 1 point, Unsatisfactory = 0 points
        FY________  Rating ________ 			______
        FY________  Rating ________ 			______
        FY________  Rating ________ 			______

									TOTAL:	______
________________________________________________________________________

Service Length (for tie breaking only) 		Years   	Months	Days

SES and equivalent* civilian Federal service:		______	______	______
Total Federal service, including SES and equivalent:	______	______	______

________________________________________________________________________

Information recorded by:_____________________________	Date ______________
*	includes Executive Level, SL, ST, SBRS, and "supergrade"



















751-1 Exhibhit 751-1-A
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH&HUMAN SERVICES            (Office of the Secretary
_______________________________________________________________________
Memorandum

Date		November 8, 1982

From		Assistant Secretary for
		Personnel Administration

Subject		Delegation of Authority to Issue Official Reprimands
		Under HHS Personnel Instruction 751-1

To		Heads of HHS Operating Divisions
		Assistant Secretary for Management and Budget
		Director, Office of Child Support Enforcement

Under the authority vested in the Assistant Secretary for Personnel Administration by memorandum from the Secretary dated March 11, 1966, as modified by the Secretary's Reorganization Order of March 8, 1977, I hereby delegate the authority to issue Official Reprimands under HHS Personnel Instruction 751-1 to Heads of Operating Divisions, the Assistant Secretary for Management and Budget for the Office of the Secretary, and the Director, Office of Child Support Enforcement, for employees in their respective organizations, including employees in or under a regional office.

Requirements and instructions for exercising this authority are contained in HHS Personnel Instruction 751-1, "Official Reprimands ."  This delegation is effective on January 1, 1983.  It may be redelegate, and further redelegation may be authorized.  All delegations and redelegations must be in writing, in memorandum format, and published as supplements to the HHS Personnel Manual.

This delegation supersedes HHS Personnel Instruction 250-22, "Authority to Propose and Issue Official Reprimands," dated December S, 1973.  Existing redelegations made under that previous delegation will continue in effect for 90 days from the effective date of this memorandum (i.e., through March 31, 1983).           




						Thomas S.McFee
 























752
752: Discipline and Adverse Action
Issuance Date:
March 20, 2009

Material Transmitted:
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 752, Corrective Action, Discipline and Adverse Actions, dated March 20, 2009.

Material Superseded:
This constitutes new policy.

Background:
Consistent with the continuous improvement initiatives, the Department is issuing Instruction 752, Corrective Action, Discipline and Adverse Actions, which is established under the authority of regulations issued by the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) found at Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 752, Adverse Actions.

The Instruction clarifies roles and responsibilities for managers when addressing employee misconduct in the workplace. It also establishes guidance and criteria to ensure that corrective action is consistent with good management practices.

This issuance is effective immediately. Implementation under this issuance must be carried out in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, bargaining agreements, and Departmental policy.

Antonia T. Harris
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources
Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management

INSTRUCTION 752
Subject: Chapter 752 Corrective Action, Discipline and Adverse Actions
752-1-00   Purpose
752-1-10   Authority
752-1-20   Coverage
752-1-30   Definitions
752-1-40   Abbreviations
752-1-50   Responsibilities
752-1-60   Policy
752-1-70   Guidelines
752-1-80   Records

Appendix 752-1-A   Penalty Consideration
Appendix 752-1-B   HHS Guide for Corrective Action
Appendix 752-1-C   OIG Guidance/Information
Appendix 752-1-D   Guide for Implementing Alternative Discipline Program

752-1-00 Purpose
This instruction sets forth the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) policy and guidelines for administering employee discipline and adverse actions, including resolution through alternative discipline. This instruction also establishes the authority and responsibility for taking appropriate corrective action for disciplinary or certain non-disciplinary reasons, when it is determined that such actions will promote the efficiency of the service. Discipline, including alternative discipline, is meant, where possible, to prevent recurrence of inappropriate conduct while maintaining good supervisor-employee relationships and retaining valued staff.

This Instruction, also communicates guidance for penalty considerations. Requirements stated in this Instruction are consistent with law, regulations and other Departmental policies applicable at the time of its issuance. Actions taken through the application of this Instruction must comply with the requirements of pertinent laws, rules and regulations, as well as the lawful provisions of applicable negotiated agreements for employees in exclusive bargaining units.

752-1-10 Authority
Chapter 75 of Title 5, United States Code and Part 752 of Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations.

752-1-20 Coverage
This Instruction applies to all Operating Divisions (OPDIVs) and offices of HHS, although those OPDIVs with an existing Table of Penalties may refer to those in conjunction with the attached Disciplinary Guide in Appendix B. In instances where an OPDIV Table of Penalties and the Department Disciplinary Guide differ, the stricter penalty will apply. Employees covered by a collective bargaining agreement may be subject to additional procedures which may supersede/supplement those described in this Instruction.
The disciplinary/adverse action procedures described in this Instruction do not apply to an Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) or the U.S. Public Health Service Commissioned Corps, whose discipline is governed by separate regulatory and statutory requirements.
Department appointees in the Senior Executive Service (SES) are covered by Part 752-1-60B of this instruction.
Management must consult with the servicing Human Resources Office/Center (HRO/HRC) for guidance regarding employee/action coverage.
752-1-30 Definitions
Administrative Leave. An excused absence from duty without charge to leave or loss of pay.
Adverse Action. For purposes of this Instruction, a personnel action taken by management, appealable to the Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB), to effect an employee's removal, suspension for more than 14 days, furlough without pay for 30 days or less, or reduction in grade or pay.
Alternative discipline (AD). An alternative to traditional discipline, usually when the traditional penalty would be less than removal.
Day. A calendar day (except where otherwise specified).
Deciding Official. A Department supervisor or manager who makes a decision on proposed adverse action or disciplinary action.
Disciplinary Action. For purposes of this Instruction, an action taken by management, not appealable to the MSPB (i.e., written reprimand; suspension for 14 days or less) to address employee misconduct.
Enforced Leave. Making the employee use his or her own sick or annual leave (after the 30-day notice period with pay) pending investigation, inquiry, or further agency action.
Furlough. The placement of an employee in a temporary status without duties and pay because of lack of work or funds or other non-disciplinary reasons.
Grade. A level of classification under a position classification system.
Indefinite Suspension. The placement of an employee in a temporary status without duties and pay pending investigation, inquiry, or further agency action. The indefinite suspension continues for an indeterminate period of time and ends with the occurrence of the pending conditions set forth in the notice of action which may include the completion of any subsequent administrative action.
Last Chance Agreements. Terms agreed to by an employee (or former employee) and an employer under which the employee will be given a last opportunity to keep or get back his or her employment, usually when the agency would otherwise remove (or has removed) the employee for performance, conduct, or leave deficiencies. Usually, though not always, such agreements provide for some waiver of appeal or complaint rights.
Pay. The rate of basic pay fixed by law or administrative action for the position held by an employee.
Preponderance of the Evidence. That degree of relevant evidence which a reasonable person, considering the record as a whole, might accept as sufficient to find that a contested fact is more likely to be true than untrue.
Proposing Official. A Department supervisor or manager who proposes an adverse or disciplinary action.
Removal. The involuntary separation of an employee from employment with the Department and Federal service, except when effected due to a reduction-in-force or the expiration of an appointment.
Suspension. The involuntary placement of an employee in a temporary non-duty, non- pay status for disciplinary reasons.
752-1-40 Abbreviations
AWOL           Absent Without Leave
CFR               Code of Federal Regulations
EAP               Employee Assistance Program
ERS               Employee Relations Specialist
GS                 General Schedule
HRO/HRC     Human Resources Office/Center
MSPB            Merit Systems Protection Board
OGC              Office of General Counsel
OIG                Office of Inspector General
OPDIV           Operational Division
OPF               Official Personnel Folder
OPM              Office of Personnel Management
OSC               Office of the Special Counsel
SES                Senior Executive Service
STAFFDIV      Staff Division
U.S.C.            United States Code
752-1-50 Responsibilities
A. Heads of OPDIV and Offices are Responsible for:

Implementing, supporting and providing oversight for the effective management of employee conduct and discipline;
Communicating information to the workforce regarding conduct requirements and disciplinary parameters;
Informing all employees of the existence of the OIG Hotline (Appendix C) which they can use to report violations of laws and regulations directly to OIG if they believe the normal supervisory channels are not appropriate;
Ensuring the promulgation of and adherence to the policy and procedural requirements of this Instruction, as well as the applicable provisions of established collective bargaining agreements as appropriate; and
Providing and implementing OPDIV/Office-wide guidance and instructions other than those outlined in this Instruction, as appropriate.
B. Director, Office of Human Resources is Responsible for:

Developing and issuing Departmental policy and guidance regarding employee conduct and discipline;
Monitoring and evaluating the administration of discipline throughout the Department, and revising the disciplinary policy and procedures as appropriate;
Providing advice and assistance to OPDIV/Offices on the provisions of this Instruction (as well as related laws, rules and regulations) and on managing employee conduct and discipline;
Establishing and implementing reporting requirements for actions taken under this Instruction, as well as complying with reporting requirements established by OPM; and
Establishing overall parameters for Department-wide conduct/discipline training and coordinating the availability of related training opportunities.
C. Servicing Human Resources Offices/Centers (HRO/HRC) are Responsible for:

Advising supervisors on employee conduct issues and disciplinary options (including procedural/regulatory parameters);
Drafting or reviewing all disciplinary notices prior to issuance and applicable case files, to ensure reasonableness of penalty and statutory/regulatory compliance;
Advising employees and supervisors of their procedural rights and responsibilities relative to this Instruction (and applicable laws, regulations and negotiated agreements);
As necessary, consulting for legal sufficiency with the OGC on adverse action proposals and decisions, and providing technical assistance to the OGC on actions taken under this Instruction;
Maintaining disciplinary and adverse action files and an information system for tracking and periodically reporting the actions effected; and
Providing operational training support to ensure the workforce is sufficiently aware of the provisions of this Instruction.
D. Office of the General Counsel is Responsible for:

As necessary, providing reviews for legal sufficiency and overall appropriateness of adverse actions being considered, proposed, or taken under this Instruction, as necessary;
When appropriate, representing the Department during settlement negotiations, MSPB appeals, arbitrations and other activities related to the administrative and federal personnel litigation process; in accordance with established Departmental policy, coordinating settlements of actions taken under this Instruction which impose a financial obligation on the Department; and
As requested, reviewing and providing input on conduct/discipline training and related instructional guidance for Department supervisors and employees as needed.
E. Supervisors are Responsible for:

Establishing and maintaining a safe, productive, supportive and well-ordered work environment;
Providing a work environment free of prohibited personnel practices, including discrimination;
Advising employees regarding assigned duties and conduct expectations, which includes observing employee performance and conduct to ensure compliance with the standards of ethical conduct and other established work requirements;
Promptly investigating and documenting circumstances related to incidents of employee misconduct with guidance from the servicing HRO/HRC;
Counseling or disciplining, as appropriate, subordinate employees in a timely manner concerning questionable conduct, pointing out specific areas of deficiency or incident, impact of the behavior, specific improvements required, and the possible consequences of continued conduct deficiencies. Supervisory counseling should include an offer to assist the employee in improving his/her conduct and to be available, within reasonable limitations, for any further consultation that the employee may request. Advise the employee of the availability of the EAP for assistance in managing any alcohol, drug, or any other personal or work related problem including stress, financial, marital, family, legal or emotional difficulties. Refrain from making a determination as to whether or not the employee actually has a problem, diagnosing a suspected problem, and assuming the role of an EAP Counselor in dealing directly with the employee's problem.
Consult with an EAP Counselor, when appropriate, to obtain assistance in the process of referring an employee to EAP. The ERS will provide guidance in this area;
Consulting with the servicing HRO/HRC regarding employee misconduct and initiating appropriate, timely and relatively consistent corrective action as warranted; and
Recognizing and complying with the requirements of this Instruction and the applicable provisions of established collective bargaining agreements, as appropriate.
Any supervisor or management official who fails to report known or suspected criminal misconduct may be subject to disciplinary action. The supervisor must report misconduct to their supervisor, any management official, or directly to the OIG. Even though he/she may believe that disciplinary action is not warranted based upon circumstances of the case. (HHS Standards of Conduct, 45 CFR Part 73, Subpart M, Reporting Violations).
F. Employees are Responsible for:

Complying with Federal and Departmental standards of ethical conduct, completing any required training, complying with all established conduct and performance requirements, and requesting clarification if necessary;
Reporting incidents of waste, fraud, abuse, corruption and other misconduct to appropriate authorities; and
Cooperating in official investigations and furnishing testimony.
Employees will refrain from activity which is contrary to or in violation of the requirements of laws, rules, or regulations and report to his/her immediate supervisor (to other authority when appropriate) acts of misconduct by other U.S. Government employees. Any employee who fails to adhere to the above is subject to disciplinary action.

752-1-60 Policy
A. General. Employees of the Department are expected to demonstrate high standards of integrity, both on and off the job, abiding by the Department's Standards of Conduct regulations (45 CFR Part 73) and other Federal and Departmental laws, rules and regulations. When established standards of conduct are violated, or the rules of the workplace are disregarded, corrective action is warranted to motivate employees to conform to acceptable behavioral standards and prevent prohibited and/or unsafe activities. Such corrective actions, when taken under this Instruction, should comport with applicable laws and regulations, should be administered with relative consistency and should be taken for such cause as will promote the efficiency of the service. Whenever appropriate, supervisors should consider using alternative discipline procedures in order to correct behavior while maintaining good and respectful working relationships.

B. Standard for Taking Action. Management must be able to show that the actions taken under this Instruction promote the efficiency of the service. To demonstrate this, the written notices of proposal and decision must clearly specify the charge(s) or reason(s) upon which the action is based, be able to prove the specific basis for the action by a preponderance of the evidence, be able to show the connection ("nexus") between the charge(s) and promotion of the efficiency of the service, and be able to establish the reasonableness of the action taken under the circumstances.

1. SES: In taking a corrective action against an appointee in the SES, management's options are limited to a written reprimand or an adverse action covered by this Instruction (i.e., suspension for more than 14 days; removal from the Federal service); management may take an adverse action against an SES employee only for misconduct, neglect of duty, malfeasance, or failure to accept a directed reassignment or to accompany a position in a transfer of function.

C. Use and Choice of Discipline. Discipline should be imposed to correct improper employee conduct and to maintain order, morale and workplace safety throughout the workforce. After determining that misconduct occurred and that corrective action is warranted, discipline should be initiated as soon as practicable after the misconduct which prompted it and effected on a progressive and equitable basis as much as possible. These progressive applications of penalties are known as progressive discipline. This concept should be applied in all cases except where penalties are prescribed by law, rule, or regulation; or instances where management deems the misconduct is egregious enough to warrant more serious action up to and including removal.

Management officials must exercise reasonable judgment and consider all relevant factors, both mitigating and aggravating (as reflected in the guidance found at Appendix A), in determining the most appropriate corrective action for each situation, including whether alternative discipline should be an option in a given situation. As a guide for considering disciplinary options, the Department's Guide to Corrective Action is included as Appendix B to this Instruction, as is the Guide to Alternative Discipline. These Guides do not mandate the use of specific penalties in most disciplinary situations. Supervisors/managers retain full authority, except in limited circumstances (i.e., discipline prescribed by statute or the MSPB), to set penalties as they deem appropriate, based on the particular circumstances and specifications of the offense. Consultation and close coordination with the servicing HRO/HRC should ensure that a particular penalty is proportional to the offense and employees who commit similar offenses are treated with relative consistency.

752-1-70 Guidelines
A. General. Taking a corrective action against an employee is appropriate only when the employee has engaged in identifiable misconduct adversely affecting the efficiency of the service. Before initiating such action, management should conduct a thorough inquiry into any apparent offense (collecting information to the greatest extent practicable directly from the subject employee) to ensure the objective consideration of all relevant facts and aspects of the situation. Ordinarily, this inquiry will be conducted by the appropriate line supervisor or designee, with guidance from the servicing HRO/HRC. However, certain situations (particularly those involving possible criminal activity) warrant an investigation by the OIG or other law enforcement such as the Office of Internal Affairs, Federal Protective service or local police department.

Once it is established that an employee engaged in misconduct necessitating corrective action, a supervisor or other management official (using the guidance at Appendices A and B, and in consultation with the servicing HRO/HRC) must determine the action/penalty required to deter the recurrence of the unacceptable behavior.

Under the best of circumstances, minor misconduct should be corrected through informal supervisory counseling advising the employee promptly after the first instance of unacceptable behavior. The supervisor also may rely on notices of warning/admonishment and alternative discipline to convince the employee to change the undesirable behavior. These actions are less severe than or equivalent to the disciplinary and adverse actions described below, are less subject to review by third parties, and do not become part of the employee's permanent official employment record. Notices of warning/admonishment document the employee's misconduct, place the employee on notice regarding the behavior expected by management, and advise the employee that more serious corrective action (e.g., reprimand; suspension; removal) will result if the unacceptable behavior is not corrected. The use of such corrective actions does not constitute a "prior penalty" for disciplinary purposes to increase the severity of penalty for a subsequent offense; however, such corrective actions may be viewed as "prior notice." The use of alternative discipline, however, can constitute "prior penalty," either for a specific timeframe or for an indefinite period.

B. Means of Handling Misconduct

Counseling or Verbal Warnings should be used by the supervisor when:
Infractions are minor and infrequent; and
The supervisor determines that counseling and/or verbal warnings will likely preclude a recurrence of the misconduct.
Formal discipline is not warranted.
Warns that disciplinary action may result if the unacceptable conduct continues.
Is not a formal disciplinary action.
Is not maintained in the employee's OPF. That he/she may grieve the issuance of the letter of admonishment, caution or warning, by following the grievance procedures in HHS Instruction 771-3 or a negotiated grievance procedure, whichever is applicable.
A Letter of Admonishment, Caution, or Warning issued by the supervisor:
Serves as a written notice, and/or confirmation of counseling, and/or verbal warning that conduct is unacceptable.
Warns that disciplinary action may result if the unacceptable conduct continues.
Is not a formal disciplinary action (however may be considered appropriate corrective action).
Is not maintained in the employee's OPF.
The employee may grieve the issuance of the letter of admonishment, caution or warning, by following the grievance procedures in HHS Instruction 771-3 or a negotiated grievance procedure, whichever is applicable.
A Letter of Reprimand:
Is a formal disciplinary action.
May be issued without formal advance notice or proposal.
Will inform the employee:
Of the specific acts for which he/she is being reprimanded.
That a copy will be maintained in his/her OPF for determined length of time not to exceed 2 years.
That s/he may grieve the issuance of the letter of reprimand, by following the grievance procedures in HHS Instruction 771-3, or a negotiated grievance procedure, whichever is applicable.
That a repetition of the offense or other improper conduct may lead to more severe disciplinary action, up to and including removal from the Federal service.
A Disciplinary Action for a Suspension of 14 Calendar Days or Less, the employee is entitled to:
A written notice which states the charge(s) and reason(s) for the proposed suspension specifically and in detail.
Be represented by an attorney or other eligible representative.
An amount of official time, up to 4 hours or in compliance with the applicable negotiated agreements, to secure affidavits and prepare a written and/or oral answer.
The opportunity to review all material relied upon to support the reason(s) for the proposal.
The opportunity to submit a written and/or oral reply, up to 7 days or in compliance with the applicable negotiated agreements, to the proposal and consideration of the reply before a decision is made.
A written decision before the effective date of the suspension (and at the earliest practicable date) which provides the reason(s) for the suspension, and the right to file a grievance or EEO complaint.
An Adverse Action for a Suspension of More Than 14 Calendar days, the employee is entitled to:
A written notice stating all charge(s) and all reason(s) for the proposed suspension at least 30 calendar days in advance of the effective date of any decision.
Be represented by an attorney or other eligible representative.
An amount of official time, up to 4 hours or in compliance with the applicable negotiated agreements, to secure affidavits and prepare a written and/or oral answer.
The opportunity to review all materials relied upon to support the reason(s) for the proposal.
The opportunity to submit a written and/or oral reply, up to 14 days or in compliance with the applicable negotiated agreements, to the proposal and consideration of the reply before a decision is made.
A written decision before the suspension is effective (and at the earliest practicable date) stating which of the reasons in the advance notice have been sustained, and which have not been sustained.
The right to appeal a decision to suspend for more than 14 calendar days to the MSPB or to grieve the matter through a negotiated grievance procedure when applicable, but not both.
The right to file an EEO complaint if the employee believes the action was taken as the result of discrimination.
X  Reduction in Grade and Pay may be warranted as a result of misconduct:

When the employee cannot be continued in his/her present position;
Reassignment at his/her present grade is not possible or practical; and
When there is a reasonable belief that the misconduct will not or cannot continue at a lower grade level.
NOTE: Alternative discipline may be considered in all the above instances of discipline.

X  Removal action is taken only:

Where removal is specified by law; or
As warranted by the misconduct in question.
Removal action is taken by following the procedures described above for A Suspension of More Than 14 Calendar Days.
In certain cases, Last Chance Agreement may be an appropriate option to consider.
NOTE: The procedural requirements described above for A suspension of More Than 14 Calendar Days and Removal, apply in processing a demotion as a result of misconduct. (These procedures do not apply to a demotion which is a result of a reclassification of a position or a voluntary downgrade.) The above actions are taken only to promote the efficiency of the service and must be in consultation with the ERS.

Status During Notice Period. Except as noted below, an employee will remain in an active duty status during the notice period provided he/she reports for duty to his/her assigned post of duty or requests leave in accordance with standard procedures.
Nonduty, Pay Status. When there is a reasonable cause to believe an employee has committed a crime for which sentence of imprisonment may be imposed, the Agency may place an employee in a nonduty status with pay for a time not to exceed 10 calendar days and provide the employee a reasonable time, but not less than 7 calendar days, to respond to a proposed action. This shortened notice period is commonly known as the crime provision. Upon being informed of such a crime, the supervisor should consult with their HRO/HRC before placing the employee in a non- duty status.
There may be other situations, such as where there is a threat to employees or property (or information/databases), when placing an employee in a nonduty, pay status is appropriate. In such cases, HRO/HRC should be consulted.

Enforced Leave. Placing an employee on leave without his/her consent usually constitutes a disciplinary action subject to the notice requirements described above. There are few exceptions. No supervisor should impose leave without first consulting the HRO/HRC.
752-1-80 Records
The servicing HRO/HRC shall maintain confidential disciplinary/adverse action case files; each file shall contain copies of the notice of proposed action, any written answer, a summary of any oral answer, the notice of decision (including the reasons for it), any order effecting the action, and any supporting material (e.g., witness statements; affidavits; documents; investigative reports). Disciplinary/adverse action files must be provided to various parties (e.g., the MSPB; the affected employee and/or designated representative; a grievance examiner), but need only be furnished in response to a specific request. Records must be maintained and disposed of in accordance with government wide rule or regulation. This will include any management database maintained by the HRO/HRCs.

Appendix 752-1-A
PENALTY DETERMINATION
After establishing a sufficient basis for taking action (i.e., a preponderance of the evidence to support the charge(s); a nexus between the offense(s) and the employee's job or the agency's mission), the supervisor/manager, in consultation with the servicing HRO/HRC, must determine the appropriate penalty for the employee's misconduct.

The MSPB has determined that mitigation of an agency-imposed adverse action (removal, suspension of more than 14 calendar days, reduction in grade or pay, and furlough of less than 30 calendar days), is appropriate when the penalty is determined by the MSPB to be excessive, disproportionate to sustained charges, or arbitrary, capricious, or unreasonable. The MSPB in Douglas v. Veterans Administration, 5 M.S.P.R. 280 (1981), the MSPB identified a number of factors -- generally referred to as the "Douglas Factors" that must be considered in taking an adverse action. For all formal disciplinary actions, but especially adverse actions, supervisors/managers should be prepared to demonstrate that the following were considered:

The nature and seriousness of the offense, and its relation to the employee's duties, position, and responsibilities, including whether the offense was intentional or technical or inadvertent, or was committed maliciously or for gain, or was frequently repeated;
The employee's job level and type of employment, including supervisory or fiduciary role, contacts with the public, and prominence of the position;
The employee's past disciplinary record;
The employee's past work record, including length of service, performance on the job, ability to get along with fellow workers, and dependability;
The effect of the offense upon the employee's ability to perform at a satisfactory level and its effect upon supervisors' confidence in the employee's ability to perform assigned duties;
Consistency of the penalty with those imposed upon other employees for the same or similar offenses;
Consistency of the penalty with any applicable agency table of penalties;
The notoriety of the offense or its impact upon the reputation of the agency;
The clarity with which the employee was on notice of any rules that were violated in committing the offense, or had been warned about the conduct in question;
Potential for the employee's rehabilitation;
Mitigating circumstances surrounding the offense such as unusual job tensions, personality problems, mental impairment, harassment, or bad faith, malice or provocation on the part of others involved in the matter; and
The adequacy and effectiveness of alternative sanctions to deter such conduct in the future by the employee or others.
Not all 12 Douglas factors will apply in every case. The relevant factors must be balanced in each case to arrive at the appropriate penalty. Frequently, some of the pertinent factors will weigh in the employee's favor while others may not (or even constitute aggravating factors).

It is advisable that when addressing an adverse action case and considering the pertinent mitigating and/or aggravating factors, you do so in conjunction with the assistance of your servicing HRO/HRC.

Appendix 752-1-B
Guide for Corrective Action
This Guide is intended for use in determining the most appropriate charges and penalties for behavior(s) or action(s) which warrant corrective/remedial action and helps to ensure a relative consistency of penalties for like offenses. Users should consider the Nature of Offense column as a listing of general categories of offenses and not use it as the specific terminology in framing charges; it is not all-inclusive and is not intended to address every conceivable disciplinary situation. Managers should be careful to avoid force-fitting an offense or charge into an existing category. Rather, the Table is to be used as a guide for selecting a charge and penalty that fits a particular situation.

The Guide lists only formal disciplinary actions (i.e., those which become a matter of record in the employee's OPF). It does not mention oral warnings, counseling letters, and similar actions which are considered informal disciplinary actions and may be more appropriate for correcting minor offenses. The First Offense column, therefore, refers to the first offense for which formal discipline is being administered, although it may not be the first time a violation has occurred.

The offenses need not be identical or similar in order to support progressively more severe action against an employee. A second offense need not be related to the first offense to support a more severe penalty. The penalties suggested in the Guide are guidelines only; nothing precludes management from proposing and then imposing no penalty, or a lesser or more severe penalty than that offered by the Guide, as circumstances warrant. Such circumstances, however, should be fully documented in the decision letter. (Note that a deciding official cannot impose a more severe penalty than that originally proposed in the proposal letter.)

DISCIPLINARY GUIDE
HHS GUIDE FOR DISCIPLINARY PENALTIES
NATURE OF OFFENSE                                                                                          	PENALTY FOR FIRST OFFENSE                                                                             	PENALTY FOR SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE                                    
1. FISCAL IRREGULARITIES (Penalty depends on the monetary value, position held, personal benefit, and/or other pertinent factors.)
a. Submission of (or causing or allowing the submission of) falsely stated time logs, leave forms, travel or purchase vouchers, payroll, loan, or other fiscal document(s).	Letter of Reprimand to Removal, if for administrative convenience or to avoid following required procedures.	Removal
 	14-Day Suspension, if it results in personal benefit to another.	Removal
 	Removal, if it results in personal benefit.	 
b. Unauthorized and/or improper use of property, Government or other funds, or any other thing of value coming into an employee's custody as a result of employment.	14-Day Suspension to Removal           	Removal
c. Failure to properly account for or make proper distribution of any property, Government or other funds, or any other thing of value coming into an employee's custody as a result of employment.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	Removal
d. Concealment of (or failing to report) missing, lost, or misappropriated funds, or other fiscal irregularities.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	14-Day Suspension to Removal
2. FALSE STATEMENT(S)/INCORRECT OFFICIAL DOCUMENTS (False statements or entries in connection with fiscal matters and documents are covered in 1. above.)
a. Deliberate falsification of an application for employment, or other personal history record by omission or by making a false entry.
Note: If an incorrect or inaccurate entry or statement is determined to be unintentional, other (non-disciplinary) action should be taken.	Removal, if it would have adversely affected selection for appointment or promotion.	 
 	Letter of Reprimand to 14-Day Suspension, if it would not have adversely affected selection for appointment or promotion.	14-Day Suspension to Removal
b. Misrepresentation, falsification, or concealment of material facts or documents in connection with an official matter, including an investigation.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	Removal
c. Knowingly and willfully making an incorrect entry on an official document or approving an incorrect official document.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	14-Day Suspension to Removal
3. CONDUCT PREJUDICIAL TO THE BEST INTERESTS OF THE SERVICE
a. Conduct which causes the employee to be indicted or charged with a criminal offense which is related directly to the duties of the employee's position or the mission of the Agency and for which a sentence of imprisonment may be imposed.	Indefinite Suspension (Until the outcome of the legal action is known and/or until the completion of appropriate administrative action.)	 
b. Conduct which causes the employee to be convicted of a criminal charge which is related directly to the duties of the employee's position or the mission of the Agency.	Removal	 
c. Off duty conduct which adversely affects the employee's job performance or trustworthiness, or adversely affects the ability of the Agency to accomplish its mission or otherwise identifiable nexus to the employee's position.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	Removal
d. Infamous or notoriously disgraceful conduct.	Removal	 
e. Concealing, removing, mutilating, altering or destroying Government records.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	14-Day Suspension to Removal
f. Malicious or intentional damage or loss of Government- owned or Government-leased property.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	14-Day Suspension to Removal
g. Using public office for private gain.	14-Day Suspension to Removal	Removal
h. Unethical or improper use of official authority or credentials.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	Removal
i. Unauthorized disclosure or use of (or failure to safeguard) information protected by the Privacy Act or other official, sensitive, or confidential information.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	Removal
j. Having a direct or indirect financial interest that an employee could reasonably expect to be in conflict or appear to be in conflict with his or her official duties and responsibilities. (When a conflict of financial interest occurs that is inadvertent and that could not be reasonably anticipated by the employee, the situation would normally be handled by divestiture or recusation rather than disciplinary action.)	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	Removal
k. Engaging in outside employment or other activities without required prior approval.	Letter of Reprimand to 5- Day Suspension	14-Day Suspension to Removal
1. Improperly soliciting or accepting, directly or indirectly, a gift from any individual or establishment seeking or having a contractual or business relationship with the Department.	5-Day Suspension to Removal	Removal
m. Improperly soliciting a contribution from another employee for a gift to an official superior, making a donation as a gift to an official superior, or accepting a gift from an employee receiving less pay.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	Removal
n. Borrowing money from a subordinate employee, securing a subordinate's endorsement on a loan, or otherwise having a subordinate assume the financial responsibility of a superior.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	Removal
o. Use of (or authorizing the use of) employees, or Government owned, leased or provided property, facilities, services or credit cards, for inappropriate or non-official purposes.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	5-Day Suspension to Removal
p. Willful use of (or authorizing the use of) any Government-owned or Government-leased passenger vehicles or aircraft for other than official purposes.	30-Day Suspension to Removal [31 U.S.C. 1349(b) mandates a minimum penalty of a one month suspension for unofficial use of Government passenger carrying vehicles or aircraft.]	Removal
q. Use of (or authorizing the use of) other Government- owned or Government-leased vehicles such as trucks, aircraft, boats or other motor vehicles for other than official purposes.	30-Day Suspension to Removal	Removal
r. Carrying of unauthorized passengers in Government- owned or Government-leased vehicles such as trucks, aircraft, boats or other motor vehicles for other than official purposes.	Letter of Reprimand to 14-Day Suspension	14-Day Suspension to Removal
s. Unauthorized use, removal or possession of a thing of value belonging to another employee or private citizen.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	Removal
t. Misuse of the internet; misuse of the electronic mail; visiting websites or downloading material from the internet during duty time for non-official use; sending electronic mail for unauthorized purposes; misuse of data bases and other software for personal gain.	Reprimand to Removal	3-Day Suspension to Removal
u. Fighting, threatening, attempting to inflict or inflicting bodily harm while on Government premises and/or when in a duty status.	5-Day Suspension to Removal	14-Day Suspension to Removal
v. Use of abusive, offensive, unprofessional, distracting, or otherwise unacceptable language, gestures, or other conduct; quarreling; creating a disturbance or disruption; or horseplay.	Letter of Reprimand to 14-Day Suspension	5-Day Suspension to Removal
w. Use of slanderous, malicious, derogatory, discourteous, or otherwise inappropriate language, gestures, or other conduct toward employees, supervisors, or the public.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	5-Day Suspension to Removal
x. Failure to pay just debts in a timely and proper manner.	Letter of Reprimand to 14-Day Suspension	1-Day Suspension to Removal
y. Gambling on duty or in work areas.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	Removal
z. Participating in a strike, work stoppage, slowdown, sickout, or similar activity.	Removal	 
4. FAILURE/REFUSAL TO FOLLOW INSTRUCTION
a. Negligence, including the careless failure to comply with rules, regulations, written procedures, or proper supervisory instructions.	Letter of Reprimand to 14-Day Suspension	5-Day Suspension to Removal
b. Deliberate or malicious refusal to comply with rules, regulations, written procedures, or proper supervisory instructions.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	14-Day Suspension to Removal
c. Refusal to provide information to authorized representatives of the Department or other Government Agencies when called upon, when the inquiry relates to official matters and the information is obtained in the course of employment or as the result of relationships incident to such employment.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	Removal
d. Failure to report for duty as detailed, transferred, or reassigned.	Removal	 
e. Failure to submit required statements of financial interests and outside employment.	Letter of Reprimand to 3-Day Suspension	5-Day Suspension to Removal
5. NEGLECT OF DUTY
Careless/negligent work, loafing, sleeping on duty, wasting time, conducting personal business while on duty.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	5-Day Suspension to Removal
6. ATTENDANCE-RELATED OFFENSES (Penalty will depend on the circumstances, including length, frequency, and nature of position. To support disciplinary action, tardiness and unauthorized absences from the work place must be charged to AWOL on the employee's Time and Attendance (T&A) Report.)
a. Unexcused tardiness, including delay in: (1) reporting at the scheduled starting time, (2) returning from lunch or break periods, and (3) returning from an authorized absence from the work station.	Letter of Reprimand to 1-Day Suspension	5-Day Suspension to Removal
b. Unauthorized absence, including leaving the workstation without permission or before the end of the workday. [Time periods at right refer to the accumulated total amount of AWOL for each offense (i.e., disciplinary action proposed) rather than for each instance or occurrence of unauthorized absence. For example, if an employee is AWOL on three separate occasions and the total amount of AWOL shown on the T&As is more than 8 hours but less than 5 workdays, the proposed penalty for a first offense would normally be a suspension of from 1 to 14 days.]	Absences of 8 Hours or Less
Letter of Reprimand to 5- Day Suspension	5-Day Suspension to Removal
Absences of More Than 8 Hours But Less Than 5 Workdays
1-Day Suspension to 14-Day Suspension	14-Day Suspension to Removal
Absences of 5 Workdays or More
14-Day Suspension to Removal	Removal
7. INTOXICANTS -- Alcohol and Spirits (Agencies must assure the requirements of alcohol abuse programs are met before taking action.)
a. Unauthorized use of intoxicants while on duty, on Government property or Government- controlled property or premises where official duties are performed.	Letter of Reprimand to 14-Day Suspension	30-Day Suspension to Removal
b. Reporting to or being on duty while under the influence of intoxicants.	Letter of Reprimand to 30-Day Suspension	30-Day Suspension to Removal
c. Operating a Government-owned or Government- leased vehicle (or privately-owned vehicle on official business) while under the influence of intoxicants.	Removal [If a penalty of less than removal is determined to be appropriate, agencies should (at a minimum) suspend the employee's official driving privileges for a period of one year.]	 
8. ILLEGAL DRUGS/DRUG PARAPHERNALIA/CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES (HHS will not initiate disciplinary action when an employee -- (1) Voluntarily identifies him/herself as a user of illegal drugs prior to being identified through other means, (2) Obtains counseling and rehabilitation through EAP and (3) Thereafter refrains from illegal drug use. In all other circumstances, agencies must make appropriate referrals to the EAP and initiate appropriate disciplinary action.)
a. Possession of an illegal drug, drug paraphernalia, or unauthorized controlled substance while on duty, on Government property or Government-controlled property, or on premises where official duties are performed.	5-Day Suspension to Removal	Removal
b. Use of an illegal drug or unauthorized controlled substance while on duty, on Government property or Government-controlled property, or on premises where official duties are performed.	14-Day Suspension to Removal	Removal
c. Reporting to or being on duty while under the influence of an illegal drug or unauthorized controlled substance.	14-Day Suspension to Removal	Removal
d. Sale or distribution of an illegal drug or controlled substance.	Removal	 
e. Operating a Government-owned or Government- leased vehicle (or privately-owned vehicle on official business) while under the influence of an illegal drug.	Removal	 
f. Interfering with, or refusing or failing to submit to a properly ordered or authorized drug test, including substituting, adulterating, or otherwise tampering with a urine sample.	Removal	 
g. Use of an illegal drug or unauthorized controlled substance during non-duty hours and on non-work premises.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	Removal
9. PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY
Engaging in the types of political activity prohibited by law or by Office of Personnel Management regulations.	Removal, 5 U.S.C. 7326	Note: Referral to Office of Special Counsel is required.

Only the MSPB may mitigated to a penalty of not less than 30 days;
10. SAFETY AND HEALTH VIOLATIONS (Penalty should take into consideration whether danger to persons or property is involved.)
a. Failure to report an accident and/or injury as required.	Letter of Reprimand to 14-Day Suspension	14-Day Suspension to Removal
b. Failure or refusal to wear/use required protective equipment (e.g., seat belts, earplugs, eye protection, etc.).	Letter of Reprimand to 14-Day Suspension	14-Day Suspension to Removal
c. Operation of a Government-owned or Government- leased vehicle (or privately-owned vehicle while on official business) without an appropriate State driver's license.	5-Day Suspension to Removal	Removal
d. Failure or refusal to observe and/or enforce Safety and Health regulations or to perform duties in a safe manner.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	5-Day Suspension to Removal
11. DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES (Penalty should take into consideration whether violation is willful/deliberate, or careless/negligent.)
a. Acting or failing to act on an official matter (including a personnel action) in a manner which improperly takes into consideration an individual's political affiliation, race, color, religion, national origin, sex, marital status, age, or handicapping condition. [This includes discrimination for or against any employee or applicant for employment prohibited by 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16; 29 U.S.C. 631 or 633a; 29 U.S.C. 206(d); 29 U.S.C. 791; or any other law, rule, or regulation.]	5-Day Suspension to Removal	Removal
b. Any reprisal or retaliation action against an individual involved in the EEO complaint process.	5-Day Suspension to Removal	Removal
c. Use of remarks which relate to and insult or denigrate an individual's race, color, religion, national origin, sex, marital status, age, or handicapping condition.	Letter of Reprimand to 30-Day Suspension	14-Day Suspension to Removal
d. Negligence or insensitive conduct with respect to an individual's race, color, religion, national origin, sex, marital status, age, or handicapping condition which is determined to be discriminatory and where there is no other finding of overt discrimination.	Letter of Reprimand to 5-Day Suspension	5-Day Suspension to Removal
e. Failure to take appropriate action regarding allegations or findings of discriminatory practices.	5-Day Suspension to Removal	Removal
12. SEXUAL MISCONDUCT
a. Actual or attempted sexual assault (e.g., rape)	Removal	 
b. Inappropriate and/or unwelcome touching or other physical contact.	14-Day Suspension to Removal	30-Day Suspension to Removal
c. Pressure for (or official action based on) sexual favors, including taking action favorable to an employee because of the granting of a sexual favor or denying an action favorable to an employee because of the withholding of a sexual favor.	30-Day Suspension to Removal	Removal
d. Inappropriate and/or unwelcome teasing, jokes, actions, gestures, display of visual material of a sexual nature or remarks of a sexual nature.	Letter of Reprimand to 30-Day Suspension	14-Day Suspension to Removal
13. PROHIBITED PERSONNEL PRACTICES (Not elsewhere covered.)
Abuse of authority and commission of a prohibited personnel practice covered by 5 U.S.C. 2302.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	Removal
14. SCIENTIFIC MISCONDUCT	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	Removal
Appendix 752-1-C
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL INFORMATION
Report Fraud

Phone:
1-800-HHS-TIPS
(1-800-447-8477)

Fax:
1-800-223-8164

TTY:
1-800-377-4950

E-Mail:
HHSTips@oig.hhs.gov

Mail:
Office of Inspector General
Department of Health and Human Services
Attn: HOTLINE
PO Box 23489
Washington, DC 20026

Reporting Fraud

All HHS and contractor employees have a responsibility to assist in combating fraud, waste and abuse in all departmental programs. As such you are encouraged to report matters involving fraud, waste and mismanagement in any departmental program(s) to OIG. To assist you, OIG maintains a hotline which offers a confidential means for reporting vital information.

Information is for official use only (For information on confidentiality please contact the hotline and ask about our confidentiality source program).
Each caller is encouraged to assist the OIG by providing information on how they can be contacted for additional information but caller may remain anonymous.

To the best of your ability, please provide the following information when contacting the Hotline:

Type of complaint:

Medicare Part-A
Medicare Part-B
Child Support Enforcement
National Institute of Health
Indian Health Service
Food and Drug Administration
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
Health Resources and Services Administration
Aid to Children and Families
All Other HHS Agencies or Related Programs

HHS department or program being affected by your allegation of fraud waste or abuse/mismanagement:

Administration for Children and Families (ACF)
Child Support Enforcement (CSE)
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS)
Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Office of Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
Indian Health Service (IHS)
Office of Inspector General (OIG)
Office of the Secretary (OS)
Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA)
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Administration (SAMSHA)
Administration on Aging (AOA)
Agency for Health Care Policy and Research Other (please specify)

Please provide the following, if you would like your referral to be submitted anonymously please indicate in your correspondence or phone call:

Your Name
Your Street Address
Your City/County
Your State
Your Zip Code
Your email Address

Subject/Person/Business/Department that allegation is against:

Name of Subject
Title of Subject (if applicable)
Subject's Street Address
Subject's City/County
Subject's State
Subject's Zip Code
Please provide a brief summary relating to your allegation.

Appendix 752-1-D
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
GUIDE FOR IMPLEMENTING AN ALTERNATIVE DISCIPLINE PROGRAM
Prepared by:

Office of Human Resources
Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management

September 10, 2002

TABLE OF CONTENTS
What is Alternative Discipline?
How does is work?
What are the criteria for using it?
How does it benefit the organization and the employee?
What other considerations are there?
At what stage of the process can it be used?
What are some examples of alternatives?
What kind of format should be used?
How do you know when the process is over?
Exhibit 1 - Sample Agreement
Exhibit 2 - Sample Agreement
Exhibit 3 - Sample Violation Notice
I. What is alternative discipline?
Alternative discipline is an alternative to traditional penalties for employee misconduct. It is a form of alternative dispute resolution that can be used to effectively resolve, reduce or even eliminate workplace disputes that arise from circumstances where disciplinary action is appropriate. The traditional penalties which alternative discipline generally replace are suspensions and removals. Last chance agreements (LCA) are a form of alternative discipline.

II. How does alternative discipline work?
The option to offer alternative discipline to an employee is the right of management, generally the supervisor or manager with authority to propose or decide disciplinary action against the employee. The process allows management and an employee who has committed an infraction to negotiate an alternative form of corrective action in lieu of traditional discipline, if some basic criteria are first met. The agreement between management and the employee is formalized in a written "Alternative Discipline Agreement" which details all of the terms and conditions used to resolve the situation.

III. What are the criteria for considering whether alternative discipline may be appropriate?
The traditional penalty for the misconduct is suspension or removal, and there is not a statutory/regulatory penalty for the infraction (i.e., a 30 day suspension for a first offense of "willful misuse of a government vehicle");
The employee acknowledges responsibility for the behavior(s) giving rise to the need for corrective/disciplinary action, expresses remorse for such behavior and agrees not repeat the behavior(s);
The manager determines that alternative discipline has a good probability of preventing further misconduct by the employee;
The employee agrees to waive all grievance, appeal and/or EEO complaint rights with respect to the particular action. The employee also agrees to waive grievance and appeal rights in connection with the particular instance of misconduct even if traditional discipline is later imposed because the employee fails to fulfill the terms of the alternative discipline agreement. However, an employee may not waive prospective EEO rights; and,
The use of alternative discipline in cases involving bargaining unit employees must not be precluded by the negotiated agreement. Note: Where a term of an alternative discipline agreement affects a condition of employment of one or more bargaining unit employees (other than employee whose conduct is at issue), management is obligated to notify the Union and give it the opportunity to exercise its representational rights.
IV. How does alternative discipline benefit the organization and the employee?
Less negative impact on supervisor/employee relationship. The interactive process of developing an alternative discipline agreement between the manager and employee can provide common ground for preserving or repairing the employer-employee relationship which is frequently unrecoverable after traditional discipline is imposed. The employee can be viewed as an individual who is willing to take responsibility for his/her actions and management can be viewed as willing to work with the employee and help restore or rebuild a cooperative work relationship. In addition, by actively participating in the process, an employee is more likely to fulfill the expectations agreed to and modify his/her behavior appropriately.
Productivity of employee. The organization retains the services of an employee instead of losing productivity in cases where the employee would have been given a traditional suspension. There is little or no interruption to the daily flow of work and no need to temporarily inconvenience co-workers who may have to pitch in while an employee is on suspension.
Quicker closure. Because cases resolved by alternative discipline agreements are closed more quickly than traditional cases and because they include waivers of grievance, appeal and complaint rights, the matter is resolved and closed with the signing of the agreement. There are no lingering issues or litigation to disrupt the work of the organization or the relationship between the employee, his/her supervisor and the organization as a whole.
Addresses the real purpose of discipline. In the Federal government, discipline is meant to be remedial and corrective rather than punitive. Alternative discipline, with its focus on a collaborative, constructive outcome, is truly remedial.
Time and resource savings. As described more fully in the next section, alternative discipline may be offered at any stage of the disciplinary process. When alternative discipline is used before a traditional penalty has been proposed or decided, a significant savings in time and resources can be realized for management, the employee and the servicing human resources office. The traditional disciplinary process can be protracted and even if alternative discipline is used after a decision has been made, additional time and resources to investigate and defend against complaints, grievances and appeals can be saved since the employee must waive all rights to contest the action.
V. What other considerations should be taken into account?
An agency may consider excluding some forms of misconduct from the alternative discipline process altogether because of the seriousness of the infractions (e.g., workplace violence, discrimination, reprisal/retaliation, and sexual harassment).
Decisions regarding whether to offer alternative discipline to an employee must be equitable. Like many other decisions, managers are expected to consider all relevant information and weigh the pros and cons of various options. With the criteria outlined above, a manager, with the assistance of his/her Labor/Employee Relations Specialist, should be able to arrive at an appropriate conclusion regarding whether to offer alternative discipline in a given situation.
VI. At what stage(s) of the disciplinary process may alternative discipline be considered?
Alternative discipline may be initiated instead of traditional discipline or at any stage of the traditional process.

Instead of traditional discipline: If management decides to offer an employee alternative discipline instead of initiating the traditional disciplinary process, the servicing Employee/Labor Relations Specialist must first prepare a written analysis for management and the employee which identifies: 1. the employee's misconduct; 2. the law, rule, regulation, policy or procedure that was violated; and, 3. the traditional penalty that would have been proposed in the absence of alternative discipline.

The employee must be provided an opportunity to review the written analysis in order to make an informed choice between traditional and alternative discipline. If the employee chooses alternative discipline prior to the initiation of the traditional disciplinary process, he/she must be informed that in choosing alternative discipline at this stage, he/she waives Chapter 75 due process rights. The alternative discipline agreement must contain an explicit description of these waivers. The employee must also agree that if he/she fails to fulfill any term or condition of the agreement, the traditional penalty identified in the written analysis will be imposed without additional due process, including the right to grieve or appeal. See Exhibit 1.

During the traditional disciplinary process: Alternative discipline may also be offered at any time after the traditional disciplinary process has begun. For example, it may be offered after a notice of proposed suspension or removal has been issued, after the employee's oral and/or written reply to a proposal or after a decision has been reached. See Exhibit 2.

VII. What are some examples of alternatives to traditional disciplinary penalties?
There are a number of options that, singly or in combination, may be appropriate as alternatives to traditional penalties. These examples are not all inclusive and supervisors, employee relations offices and employees are encouraged to be creative and innovative in using the options on the following page as well as others while remaining within the confines of law and statute.

Donation of accrued annual leave to an approved recipient in the leave donor program or to the Agency's leave bank.
Leave without pay (LWOP) in lieu of suspension. (Note: an FLSA-covered employee cannot report to work during an LWOP period.)
Paper suspension, in which an SF-50 documenting a suspension of a specific number of days is placed in the employee's Official Personnel File, but the employee does not actually serve a suspension. He/she remains in active duty status, performing work and getting paid. The SF-50 could be removed from the OPF after an agreed upon period of time (2 years, 4 years).
Performance of unpaid, off-duty community service related to the offense. For example, instead of a 30 day suspension for drinking alcohol on the job, the employee agrees to perform 120 hours of community service in an alcohol abuse center. This must be documented to ensure that the employee performed the community service work.
Agreement to seek and actively participate in counseling through the Employee Assistance Program or other organization. This must be documented to ensure that the employee attends and participates and can be done without violating the employee's privacy.
Holding all or part of a suspension in abeyance for periods of time (generally one to two years) while the employee demonstrates acceptable conduct and/or performance.
Writing, developing and/or presenting a variety of e-mails, memoranda, instructional guides, training modules, etc., that explains a specific aspect of proper conduct and the potential consequences for violating approved standards.
Making restitution to either the Agency or the Department of Treasury for monies owed to the government for unauthorized personal long-distance phone calls, credit card charges, time and attendance abuse, "wasting" official time, etc.
VIII. What is the appropriate format for alternative discipline agreements and what standard terms should be included?
The samples in this Guide are examples of the recommended format for such agreements. They are presented in a commonly used settlement agreement format and clearly delineate the terms agreed to by management and the employee. Alternative discipline agreements, like settlement agreements, are considered to be contracts between parties. As such, whatever is spelled out in the document frames any future argument as to the meaning of various terms. Therefore, terms should be explicit, particularly those which explain what the employee will do in lieu of traditional discipline and the rights he/she is waiving.

At a minimum, all alternative discipline agreements should include the following:

A description of the misconduct and a statement that the disciplinary analysis resulted in a determination that a specified "traditional" penalty is warranted under formal disciplinary procedures. If alternative discipline is agreed to after initiation of the traditional process, attach the proposal and decision letters, as appropriate, to the agreement.
A statement in which the employee admits that he/she engaged in the improper conduct, recognizes the misconduct was unacceptable, and promises that these acts will not occur again.
A description of the terms and conditions that must be met for the employee to satisfactorily fulfill the agreement. The terms must include the timeframe(s) in which the employee must satisfy the agreement.
A clause addressing the retention of records associated with the agreement (such as the case file and a copy of the agreement). In most HHS agencies, 4 years is the retention period for disciplinary action files. The agreement should specify the agency's retention period.
A statement in which the employee agrees that if he/she fails to satisfy the terms and conditions of the agreement, the traditional penalty specified in the agreement will be effected immediately.
A statement that the agreement was entered into voluntarily and that the employee had the opportunity to seek the advice of a personal representative.
A statement that the misconduct addressed through the alternative discipline agreement constitutes an offense and may be used to support any future progressive disciplinary action(s), traditional or alternative.
A statement that the terms and conditions of the agreement are confidential but that they may be shared with parties who have an official need to know.
A statement that the terms and conditions of the agreement are nonprecedential, meaning they are specific to the employee, and may not be cited for comparison purposes in any other case.
If applicable, an acknowledgment that no salary or wage compensation can be requested for any off-duty volunteer service and that such service is not covered by Workers' Compensation.
The signatures of the parties to the agreement. At a minimum, this will include the employee and the supervisor or other management official authorized to enter into such an agreement. It may also include the employee's representative and/or the Employee/Labor Relations Specialist.
IX. How do you know when an alternative discipline process has concluded?
The terms and conditions of the alternative discipline agreement are considered fulfilled when the supervisor, in consultation with the Employee/Labor Relations Specialist, determines that the employee has satisfied the terms of the agreement.

When the terms and conditions of the alternative discipline agreement are satisfied, the supervisor or Employee/Labor Relations Specialist must certify such in writing to the employee. See the "Final Disposition" section of the sample alternative discipline agreements.

If the employee is unable to fulfill the terms and conditions of the alternative discipline agreement due to circumstances beyond his/her control, the parties should revise the agreement. For example, an employee would be unable to meet the terms of an agreement if it required the employee to perform 200 hours of community service within a six- month period, but the employee became incapacitated for five or six months due to an automobile accident.

If the employee fails to satisfy the terms and conditions of the agreement, the supervisor or Employee/Labor Relations Specialist will immediately issue a violation notice to the employee. The notice will inform the employee that the agreement has been breached and the traditional penalty specified in the agreement will be effected immediately. See Exhibit 3.

EXHIBIT 1
SAMPLE ALTERNATIVE DISCIPLINE AGREEMENT

PRIOR TO INITIATION OF TRADITIONAL DISCIPLINE

ALTERNATIVE DISCIPLINE AGREEMENT BETWEEN [EMPLOYEE'S NAME] AND [OPDIV/STAFFDIV]

The PARTIES to this Agreement are [Employee's Name], title, duty station (hereafter referred to as the EMPLOYEE) and the [OpDiv/ StaffDiv] (hereafter referred to as the AGENCY). This Agreement is entered into as an alternative to the initiation of a proposal to suspend the EMPLOYEE without pay for 3 calendar days based on the EMPLOYEE'S misconduct. Under the terms of this Agreement, the EMPLOYEE acknowledges that: he/she was absent without approved leave (AWOL) for a total of 20 hours during pay periods 21 and 22, 2000.

Based on the above, and in consideration of other factors, the AGENCY has concluded that the issuance of a proposal to suspend the EMPLOYEE from duty without pay for 3 calendar days is warranted. Formal adverse action procedures include: the issuance of a letter of proposed suspension; the EMPLOYEE'S opportunity to reply orally and/or in writing to the charges set forth in the proposal; the issuance of a decision based on the proposal and the EMPLOYEE'S oral and/or written response to the charges (including any mitigating factors presented by the EMPLOYEE); and, the EMPLOYEE'S right to file a negotiated/administrative grievance regarding the action taken by the AGENCY. However, the PARTIES have agreed to the following as an alternative to the AGENCY initiating formal adverse action procedures:

The EMPLOYEE admits that he/she committed the misconduct cited above; recognizes the misconduct was unacceptable; and, promises that these acts will not occur in the future.
The EMPLOYEE agrees to donate 24 hours of annual leave to an approved leave donor recipient within 30 days of the date of the last signature on this Agreement and to provide his/her supervisor, [name], with proof that such a donation was made, no later than 10 days after making the donation.
The EMPLOYEE acknowledges that his/her failure to comply with #2 above will result in the automatic imposition of a 3 calendar day suspension without pay (without the issuance of proposal to suspend letter, an opportunity to reply, a written decision letter and the right to grieve the AGENCY'S action).
The AGENCY agrees that if the EMPLOYEE fully complies with the condition specified in #2 above, the AGENCY will not impose the 3 calendar day suspension.
The EMPLOYEE understands that an additional offense of this nature, or any other misconduct on his/her part, may result in a proposal for more severe disciplinary action, up to and including a proposal to remove him/her from the Federal service. The EMPLOYEE further understands that the misconduct cited in this Agreement, as well as the resulting Agreement, may be cited as a first offense in determining any subsequent disciplinary action.
The EMPLOYEE understands that this Agreement does not preclude the AGENCY from initiating and/or taking appropriate action regarding any other misconduct not covered by this Agreement.
The EMPLOYEE agrees to waive any and all rights to appeal, grieve, complain of, or otherwise contest actions relating to or arising out of his/her employment prior to the effective date of this agreement. The EMPLOYEE may not in any way contest the imposition of traditional discipline arising from a breach of this Agreement; however, he/she may contest a determination that one or more terms of this Agreement has been breached. The EMPLOYEE cannot waive prospective EEO complaint rights.*
The EMPLOYEE understands that this Agreement will be maintained with the disciplinary files in the AGENCY'S Employee Relations office for a period of 4 years from the date of the last signature on this Agreement in compliance with Employee Relations record-keeping requirements.
The PARTIES understand that this Agreement is not confidential and will be used in any manner necessary to carry out the terms. However, it will be shared only with those who have an official need to know.
The PARTIES understand that the terms and conditions of this Agreement are nonprecedential, meaning they are specific to the EMPLOYEE, and may not be cited for comparison to another employee's alternative discipline agreement or traditional disciplinary action.
There are no other terms to this Agreement other than those expressly written here.
The EMPLOYEE agrees that he/she has had an opportunity to consult with a representative on the terms and conditions of this Agreement and has had an opportunity to clarify any terms or conditions which were not understood by him/her.
The EMPLOYEE understands that he/she is fully responsible for any and all attorney's fees related to his/her representation in any part of this matter.
The PARTIES understand the terms of this Agreement and willingly enter into it. This Agreement becomes effective upon the date of the last signature of the PARTIES involved.
___________________________             ___________________________
Employee's Signature                                Supervisor's Signature

___________________________            ___________________________
Date                                                           Date

FINAL DISPOSITION:
The terms and conditions of this Agreement were:     [  ] Met
                                                                                    [  ] Not Met (see attached violation notice)

___________________________                              ___________________________
Supervisor's Signature                                                Date

* Note: Where an employee is covered by the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, this term should contain an explicit waiver of an ADEA claim under the Older Workers Benefit Protection Act, as outlined in Oubre v. Entergy Operations, Inc., 117 S. Ct. 1466 (1998), regardless of whether the employee has raised the issue. (Although the EEOC has stopped short of requiring this language in agreements where an employee has NOT raised an age discrimination claim, we believe it is prudent based on the wording in Oubre.) The following language may be used for this waiver:
Under the Age Discrimination in Employment Act and the Older Workers Benefit Protection Act, the EMPLOYEE has had 21 days in which to consider the terms and conditions of this Agreement and the right to consult with legal counsel. The EMPLOYEE acknowledges that he/she has been advised by the AGENCY that he/she should consult with an attorney. The EMPLOYEE has 7 days from the signing of this Agreement to rescind it. If the EMPLOYEE wishes to rescind the Agreement, he/she must notify his/her supervisor of this decision in writing.

EXHIBIT 2
SAMPLE ALTERNATIVE DISCIPLINE AGREEMENT

AFTER TRADITIONAL DISCIPLINE HAS BEEN INITIATED

ALTERNATIVE DISCIPLINE AGREEMENT BETWEEN [EMPLOYEE'S NAME] AND [OPDIV/STAFFDIV]

The PARTIES to this Agreement are [Employee's Name], title, duty station (hereafter referred to as the EMPLOYEE) and the [OpDiv/ StaffDiv] (hereafter referred to as the AGENCY). This Agreement is entered into as an alternative to proceeding with the formal disciplinary process already underway. Under the terms of this Agreement, the EMPLOYEE acknowledges that: he/she used a government-owned computer and printer, as well as more than 40 hours of official time, to prepare publicity and marketing materials for a personal business venture. As the supervisor of the staff, he/she is responsible for adhering to proper standards of conduct and for being a positive role model for employees.

Based on the above, and in consideration of other factors, the AGENCY initiated formal disciplinary procedures and, on [date], issued the EMPLOYEE a notice of proposed suspension for 21 calendar days. The EMPLOYEE submitted a timely written reply to the notice of proposed suspension and, upon consideration of the EMPLOYEE'S acceptance of responsibility for his/her conduct and remorse for damaging the implicit trust placed in him/her as a supervisor, the AGENCY offered alternative discipline in lieu of completing the formal disciplinary process, which would include a written decision letter and the opportunity to appeal, grieve, complain of or otherwise contest the final action. As a result, the PARTIES have agreed to the following as an alternative to the AGENCY completing formal adverse action procedures:

The EMPLOYEE admits that he/she committed the misconduct cited above; recognizes the misconduct was unacceptable; and, promises that these acts will not occur in the future.
The EMPLOYEE agrees to make restitution in the amount of $1050.00 (the equivalent of one week's gross salary) within 90 days of the date of last signature on this Agreement and to provide his/her supervisor, [name], with proof that such a restitution was made, no later than 15 days after making the final restitution payment. Payment will be made to the AGENCY'S finance office at [address].
The EMPLOYEE agrees to perform 40 hours of off-duty, unpaid community service with a public service organization, such as Public Television, within 90 days of the date of the last signature on this Agreement. The EMPLOYEE agrees to provide the supervisor with proof that the community service was completed.
The EMPLOYEE agrees to write and transmit an anonymous e-mail to all AGENCY employee's at his/her location reiterating the standards of conduct with respect to his/her misconduct and describing the possible consequences of misconduct of this nature. The AGENCY agrees to provide necessary support to enable an anonymous e-mail to be sent. This e-mail will be sent within 14 days of the date of the last signature of this AGREEMENT.
The EMPLOYEE acknowledges that his/her failure to comply with #2, #3 and/or #4 above will result in the automatic imposition of a 21 calendar day suspension without pay (without a written decision letter and the right to appeal the AGENCY'S action).
The EMPLOYEE understands that an additional offense of this nature, or any other misconduct on his/her part, may result in a proposal for more severe disciplinary action, up to and including a proposal to remove him/her from the Federal service. The EMPLOYEE further understands that the misconduct cited in this Agreement, as well as the resulting Agreement, may be cited as a first offense in determining any subsequent disciplinary action.
The EMPLOYEE understands that this Agreement does not preclude the AGENCY from initiating and/or taking appropriate action regarding any other misconduct not covered by this Agreement.
The EMPLOYEE agrees to waive any and all rights to appeal, grieve, complain of, or otherwise contest actions relating to or arising out of his/her employment prior to the effective date of this agreement. The EMPLOYEE may not in any way contest the imposition of traditional discipline arising from a breach of this Agreement; however, he/she may contest a determination that one or more terms of this Agreement has been breached. The EMPLOYEE cannot waive prospective EEO complaint rights.*
The EMPLOYEE understands that this Agreement will be maintained with the disciplinary files in the AGENCY'S Employee Relations office for a period of 4 years from the date of the last signature on this Agreement in compliance with Employee Relations record-keeping requirements.
The PARTIES understand that this Agreement is not confidential and will be used in any manner necessary to carry out the terms. However, it will be shared only with those who have an official need to know.
The PARTIES understand that the terms and conditions of this Agreement are nonprecedential, meaning they are specific to the EMPLOYEE, and may not be cited for comparison to another employee's alternative discipline agreement or traditional disciplinary action.
There are no other terms to this Agreement other than those expressly written here.
The EMPLOYEE agrees that he/she has had an opportunity to consult with a representative on the terms and conditions of this Agreement and has had an opportunity to clarify any terms or conditions which were not understood by him/her.
The EMPLOYEE understands that he/she is fully responsible for any and all attorney's fees related to his/her representation in any part of this matter.
The PARTIES understand the terms of this Agreement and willingly enter into it. This Agreement becomes effective upon the date of the last signature of the PARTIES involved.
___________________________             ___________________________
Employee's Signature                                Supervisor's Signature

___________________________            ___________________________
Date                                                           Date

FINAL DISPOSITION:
The terms and conditions of this Agreement were:     [  ] Met
                                                                                    [  ] Not Met (see attached violation notice)

___________________________                              ___________________________
Supervisor's Signature                                                Date

* Note: Where an employee is covered by the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), as amended, this term should contain an explicit waiver of an ADEA claim under the Older Workers Benefit Protection Act, as outlined in Oubre v. Entergy Operations, Inc., 117 S. Ct. 1466 (1998), regardless of whether the employee has raised the issue. (Although the EEOC has stopped short of requiring this language in agreements where an employee has NOT raised an age discrimination claim, we believe it is prudent based on the wording in Oubre.) The following language may be used for this waiver:
Under the Age Discrimination in Employment Act and the Older Workers Benefit Protection Act, the EMPLOYEE has: 21 days in which to consider the terms and conditions of this Agreement and the right to consult with legal counsel. The EMPLOYEE acknowledges that he/she has been advised by the AGENCY that he should consult with an attorney. The EMPLOYEE has 7 days from the signing of this Agreement to rescind it. If the EMPLOYEE wishes to rescind the Agreement, he/she must notify his/her supervisor, in writing, of this decision.

EXHIBIT 3
SAMPLE VIOLATION NOTICE

NOTICE OF VIOLATION OF ALTERNATIVE DISCIPLINE AGREEMENT

TO:	Name of Employee
Title
Organization
Location
FROM:	Name of Supervisor/Deciding Official
Title
Organization
Location
This is notice that you violated/failed to fulfill a condition of the Alternative Discipline Agreement, dated ________________, in which you agreed to:
Donate 40 hours of annual leave to an approved recipient of the leave donor program by [date].
[Describe all terms and/or conditions violated/not fulfilled.]
You failed to comply with your agreement to complete this item as an alternative to your being suspended from duty and pay for [ ] calendar days. You did not make a good faith attempt to complete this item, nor did you come to me or the employee relations office to discuss any reasons for your noncompliance.
In accordance with the terms of the Agreement, you will be suspended from duty without pay for [ ] calendar days beginning [date] and will return to duty on [date]. The personnel documents reflecting this action will follow.

























771-1
HUMAN RESOURCES MANUAL 1
Instruction 771-1: Administrative Grievance Procedure
Issuance Date: 06/05/2008
Material Transmitted:
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 771-1, Administrative Grievance Procedure, dated
June 5, 2008.
Material Superseded:
HHS Instruction 771-3, employee Grievances, dated March 7, 1995.
Background:
Consistent with the continuous improvement initiatives, the Department has updated the prior Employee Grievance
instruction by replacing it with the Administrative Grievance Procedure. This instruction has been
established under the authority of regulations issued by the Office of Personnel Management
(OPM) found at Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 771, Agency Administrative
Grievance System.
The instruction clarifies roles and responsibilities for managers when addressing employee grievances. It
provides guidance to employee for filing an administrative grievance. It more specifically identifies matters which
are grievable and non-grievable.
This issuance is effective immediately. Implementation under this issuance must be carried out
in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, bargaining agreements, and Departmental
policy.
 Antonia T. Harris
 Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources
 Assistant Secretary for Administration and
Management
INSTRUCTION 771-1
HUMAN RESOURCES MANUAL 2
Instruction 771-1: Administrative Grievance Procedure
Issuance Date: 06/05/2008
SUBJECT: ADMINISTRATIVE GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
771-1-00 Purpose
771-1-10 Coverage and Exclusions
771-1-20 Grievable and Nongrievable Matters
771-1-20 References
771-1-30 Definitions
771-1-40 Responsibilities
771-1-50 General Provisions
771-1-60 Informal Resolution
771-1-70 Procedures
771-1-80 Reporting and Accountability
Exhibit A: Sample Grievance Format
Exhibit B: Sample Decision Format
771-1-00 PURPOSE
This instruction sets forth the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Administrative
Grievance Procedure. It does not pertain to grievances of bargaining unit employees which are
covered by the negotiated grievance procedure in a collective bargaining agreement or to
Commissioned Corps Officers. The Departmental grievance procedures have been established
under the authority of regulations issued by the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) found
at Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 771, Agency Administrative Grievance System.
771-1-10 COVERAGE AND EXCLUSIONS
A. Coverage
This instruction applies to all HHS civil service employees who are not part of a bargaining unit
regardless of grade or tenure. HHS Operating Divisions may supplement the provisions of this
instruction with local administrative grievance procedures. Any local administrative grievance
procedures must fully comply with the provisions of this instruction, and this instruction is
overriding as to matters of administrative grievance policy
B. Exclusions
1. Bargaining unit employees must use the negotiated grievance procedure contained in their
respective collective bargaining agreement as the exclusive avenue of redress for matters of
concern or dissatisfaction
2. This policy does not apply to grievance procedures for Commissioned Corps Officers.
771-1-20 GRIEVABLE AND NONGRIEVABLE MATTERS
HUMAN RESOURCES MANUAL 3
Instruction 771-1: Administrative Grievance Procedure
Issuance Date: 06/05/2008
A. Grievable Matters
Except as discussed under Nongrievable Matters, the grievance system is available to resolve
matters of concern or dissatisfaction relating to the employment of an individual and under the
control of agency management. This includes any matter in which an employee alleges that
coercion, reprisal, or retaliation has occurred for using the grievance system.
B. Nongrievable Matters
1. Requests for retroactive promotion or retroactive adjustment of a promotion date when the
conditions required for such retroactive action by applicable decisions of the U.S. Office of
Personnel Management, Office of Merit Systems Oversight and Effectiveness, are not met.
2. A dispute over a matter for which an employee has an entitlement to file an appeal,
grievance, or formal challenge in some other forum. This includes matters that are
reviewable by the U.S. Merit Systems Protection Board, the Equal Employment Opportunity
commission, the Office of Personnel Management, the Comptroller General, and the Federal
Labor Relations Authority.
3. A performance progress review, documentation of performance, the methods used to
appraise performance during the appraisal period (including the methods used to conduct and
document a performance progress review), as well as any tentative or preliminary appraisal.
4. Complaints about the content of published Department policy when the complaint is a
disagreement with the policy rather than a complaint that a policy has been misinterpreted
misapplied. "Department" policy means a policy or regulation issued at either the
Department level or the Operating Division level. “Published" policy means a policy issued
for distribution in writing by a legitimate authority and does not include unwritten practices
or customs.
5. Complaints about failure to receive a noncompetitive promotion or nonselection for
competitive promotion from a group of properly ranked and certified candidates under the
merit promotion program. However, when the complaint alleges impropriety in the
competitive rating, ranking, certification, or selection process, the complaint is covered (i.e.,
is not excluded).
6. Failure to receive a cash, time off, or honorary award.
7. Matters of concern or dissatisfaction on the part of Officers of the Commissioned Corps of
the U.S. Public Health Service
8. Matters involving allegations of discrimination, when a discrimination complaint has been
filed concerning the same matter or matters. This does not preclude an employee from filing
a grievance and seeking precomplaint equal employment opportunity counselling at the same
time. However, at such time that a discrimination complaint is filed, the grievance will be
cancelled and the matter will be reviewed under applicable discrimination complaint
procedures.
9. Senior Executive Service (SES) performance-based actions such as performance evaluations
or the return of an SES career appointee to the General Schedule or another pay system
during the 1-year probationary period.
HUMAN RESOURCES MANUAL 4
Instruction 771-1: Administrative Grievance Procedure
Issuance Date: 06/05/2008
10. A decision to grant or deny an SES pay rate increase.
11. The Establishment of a Performance Improvement Plan following an unacceptable rating.
12. An action which terminates a temporary or term promotion and which returns the employee
to the position from which the employee was temporarily promoted or to a similar position at
the same grade where the employee was informed in advance that the promotion is only
temporary.
13. Failure to grant a recruitment, retention, or relocation bonus.
14. Separation or termination of an employee for unsatisfactory performance or misconduct
during a probationary or trial period.
15. The return of an employee from an initial appointment as a supervisor or manager to a nonsupervisory or non-managerial position for failure to complete the supervisor or managerial
probationary period satisfactorily.
16. Separation of employees serving under Schedule A, B, or C appointments (excepted service
appointments).
771-1-30 REFERENCES
A. Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 771, Agency Administrative Grievance System
B. Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 1201, Practices and Procedures (Merit Systems
Protection Board)
771-1-40 DEFINITIONS
A. Grievance: A matter of concern or dissatisfaction presented by an employee for which
personal relief is requested and could be granted. Personal relief must constitute action
concerning the employee presenting the grievance and cannot be an action concerning or
against another employee.
B. Informal Grievance: A matter of concern or dissatisfaction presented by an employee at
the first stage of the grievance process.
C. Formal Grievance: A matter of concern or dissatisfaction presented by an employee in
writing at the final stage of the grievance process.
D. Stage One Official: The first official within the Department with authority over the
matter at issue in the grievance. (It is the matter at issue rather than the relief sought that
determines the Stage One Official)
E. Stage Two Official: The official with delegated authority to issue the formal grievance
decision. This official must be "at a higher level than any employee involved in any
phase of the grievance, except when the Head of a Staff Division or Operating Division
has been involved." Similarly, for performance appraisal grievances, this official must be
HUMAN RESOURCES MANUAL 5
Instruction 771-1: Administrative Grievance Procedure
Issuance Date: 06/05/2008
a person at a higher level in the organization than the appraising, reviewing, or approving
official.
F. Discrimination: Discrimination means illegal discrimination because of race, color,
religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, or age when the complainant
is 40 years of age or over.
771-1-50 RESPONSIBILITIES
A. Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management (ASAM), Office of Human
Resources (OHR), is responsible for:
1. Updating and maintaining this policy.
2. Advising Operating Human Resources Organizations on the administration and operation of
grievance systems.
3. Reviewing and approving all Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) Systems prior to
implementation and ensuring that the systems comply with all applicable statutes,
regulations, and policies.
B. Operating Divisions (OPDIVs) and Staff Divisions (STAFFDIVs) are responsible for:
1. Ensuring that all grievances presented get a thorough and meaningful review, and that
employees who file grievances receive a final written decision that fully explains whether the
relief requested will be granted or not and the reasons for that decision.
2. Making final grievance decisions in regard to grievances presented by employees of the
OPDIV or STAFFDIV (a sample format for a grievance decision is enclosed as Exhibit B).
3. Drafting any local supplemental administrative grievance procedures.
4. Designing, implementing, and maintaining any ADR System made available to OPDIV or
STAFFDIV employees as an alternative to the Administrative Grievance System. Any ADR
implemented is supplemental to the Administrative Grievance System and its use must be
optional for employees. In addition, any ADR, prior to implementation, must be submitted
to the Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management for review prior to
implementation.
C. Operating Human Resources Organizations are responsible for:
1. Administering the Administrative Grievance System for their component(s).
2. Ensuring that formal grievances are processed in accordance with this instruction and any
applicable local procedures.
3. Making available copies of this instruction and any local grievance procedures to all
employees to whom human resources services are provided.
4. Advising employees of the procedures for filing a grievance and their rights and
responsibilities in doing so.
HUMAN RESOURCES MANUAL 6
Instruction 771-1: Administrative Grievance Procedure
Issuance Date: 06/05/2008
5. Advising managers on issues presented in grievances and whether types of relief requested
can or cannot be granted.
6. Drafting correspondence and decision letters for use by managers in processing and deciding
grievances.
C. HHS Employees are responsible for:
1. Following the provisions of this instruction when constructively presenting grievances for
consideration (a sample format for a proper grievance submission is enclosed as Exhibit A)
2. Adhering to the time limits specified in this instruction at each stage of the grievance
process.
3. Designating a representative in writing when a third party representative is desired.
4. Cooperating in the grievance process and providing any possible information or testimony
that will aid in resolving employee grievances.
771-1-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. Use of Official Time: Employees will be authorized a reasonable amount of work time to
present a grievance and to prepare that portion of the grievance which the employee
could not normally be expected to prepare outside of his or her regular work hours.
B. Rejection of Grievance: A grievance may be rejected, either in whole or in part, as
appropriate, at any stage by a grievance official (i.e., by the Stage One or Stage Two
Official depending upon the stage at which the grievance is being reviewed) when the
grievance:
1. Does not specifically state that it is a grievance presentation in the manner required at Stage
One or Stage Two herein.
2. Does not furnish sufficient detail to identify clearly the matter of concern or dissatisfaction at
issue.
3. Does not specify the personal relief sought.
4. Consists of a matter or matters that are excluded by this instruction or are not subject to the
control of Department management.
5. Is made by an employee or nonemployee who is not covered by this instruction.
6. Is not timely.
C. Disallowance of Representative: A grievance official may disallow an employee’s
choice of representative when that representative is an HHS employee and is either a
subordinate of the grievant or is in the grievant’s supervisory chain, or when serving as a
representative in the grievance would constitute a conflict of interest based on the
individual’s official position with HHS.
HUMAN RESOURCES MANUAL 7
Instruction 771-1: Administrative Grievance Procedure
Issuance Date: 06/05/2008
D. Travel, Per Diem, and Contractual Costs: The employing organization of the employee
must pay (either directly or by reimbursement) any travel, per diem, and contractual or
procurement costs of factfinders and employees required by proper authority for
grievance proceedings. However, travel and per diem payments will not be authorized
for an employee's representative who is not an employee of HHS.
E. Cancellation of Grievance: A grievance may be cancelled, either in whole or in part, as
appropriate; by the employee upon written notification to the appropriate grievance
official (the written notification must be made a part of the grievance file). Also, a
grievance may be cancelled by the appropriate grievance official (i.e., depending upon
the stage at which the grievance is being reviewed):
1. At the employee's request.
2. Upon termination of the employee's employment with the Department, unless the personal
relief sought by the employee can be granted after termination of employment with the
Department
3. Upon the death of the employee, unless the grievance involves a question of pay or Benefits
that could be granted to a designated beneficiary or the employee’s estate.
4. For failure of the employee to furnish required information.
5. For failure of the employee to duly proceed with advancement of the grievance.
6. A cancellation decision will be made in writing, will provide an explanation of why the
cancellation was made in accordance with applicable portions of this instruction, and will
become part of the grievance file.
771-1-70 INFORMAL RESOLUTION
Operating Divisions and Staff Divisions are granted the authority to establish an Alternate
Dispute Resolution process as mentioned in section 771-1-50 of this instruction. It is
encouraged that employees and supervisors first seek the use of an Alternative Dispute
Resolution process.
This process is available to help resolve disputes quickly at the earliest possible stage. The ADR
is a voluntary program that uses mediation to provide an opportunity to be heard and to facilitate
resolution of a dispute in a manner satisfactory to all involved. Any employee, supervisor, or
manager can request mediation if they face an issue or concern that needs to be resolved.
Participation in ADR is voluntary and confidential. This process should be mutually agreed
upon prior to its use.
771-1-80 PROCEDURES
The HHS administrative grievance procedures consist of an informal procedure (Stage One) and
a formal procedure (Stage Two) that include fact-finding when appropriate. Exhibits A. and B.
contain sample formats that can be used in presenting a grievance or issuing a grievance
decision.
HUMAN RESOURCES MANUAL 8
Instruction 771-1: Administrative Grievance Procedure
Issuance Date: 06/05/2008
A. Informal Procedure (Stage One)
1. At any time during the informal procedure, the grievance may be resolved either by a written
decision that grants in its entirety the personal relief requested by the grievant or by a written
agreement that is signed by the grievant and the grievance official and made part of the
record.
2. The informal procedure applies to all grievances, except that grievances about nonappealable adverse actions, non-appealable separations, and reassignments all begin at the
formal procedure (Stage Two).
3. Presentation of an informal grievance: The grievant must present the grievance in writing to
the Stage One Official and provide a copy of the written grievance to his or her immediate
supervisor (when the Stage One Official is not the employee's immediate supervisor). There
is no entitlement to an oral grievance presentation, unless otherwise mutually agreed upon by
the Stage One Official and at the grievant request. Oral grievance presentations must be
followed up in writing and comply with the prescribed time frame below.
4. The Stage One Official is the first official within the Department who has authority over the
matter at issue. This is usually the official who made the decision or committed the act or
omission about which the employee is dissatisfied. However:
5. A human resources official (as distinguished from a selecting official) will serve as the Stage
One Official for a grievance about rating or ranking under competitive procedures. A human
resources official is also the Stage One Official for any grievance about a decision made in
the Operating Human Resources Organization, e.g., a qualifications determination, rejection
of an application for a position vacancy, or a discretionary pay setting determination.
6. For grievances concerning performance ratings, the official who gave final approval to the
summary rating is the Stage One Official. When this official is not the rating official, he or
she may elect to consult with the rating official. Depending on the circumstances of each
summary rating, this official could be the rating official, the reviewing official, or the official
with responsibility for an applicable performance awards budget, if he or she had
discretionary approval authority over final performance ratings.
7. To distinguish mere inquiries or correspondence from grievances, the grievant must
specifically state in the written grievance that he or she is making a Stage One grievance
submission under this instruction. The written grievance must also furnish sufficient detail to
identify clearly the matter at issue, explain the basis for the grievance, and specify the
personal relief (i.e., a specific remedy directly benefiting the grievant) requested. Failure to
state personal relief that is viable will be grounds for rejecting the grievance. The grievance
should contain all available evidence, documentation, and argument to support the grievance
and to justify the personal relief requested.
8. Time Limits: The Stage One presentation must be submitted within 30 calendar days after
the act or occurrence (or the date the employee became aware of the act or occurrence) that
HUMAN RESOURCES MANUAL 9
Instruction 771-1: Administrative Grievance Procedure
Issuance Date: 06/05/2008
caused the employee to be aggrieved. Any of the requirements regarding either the content
or the time limit for a Stage One submission may be waived at the discretion of the Stage
One Official for good cause.
9. Decision: As soon as possible, but no later than 15 calendar days after receipt of the written
grievance, the Stage One Official must inform the employee in writing of the decision and
the reasons therefore. This time limit may be extended for good cause, provided the
grievance official advises the grievant that the decision will be delayed and the expected date
of the decision. Examples of good cause for this purpose include:
a. the grievance official is on leave or travel and will be unavailable, or
b. there are pressing mission requirements which will preclude the grievance official
from providing attention to the grievance. Stage One grievance decisions must be
made no later than 30 calendar days from the submission of the grievance when
the time limit has been extended for good cause. When the grievance has not
been resolved, the decision must state whom the employee must contact to pursue
the formal (Stage Two) grievance process and that the time limit for doing so is
15 calendar days after receipt of the Stage One decision.
10. Failure to Issue Timely Decision: If the Stage One Official fails to issue a decision within
the applicable time limits, the grievant may, at his or her option, proceed directly to Stage
Two within 15 calendar days of the expiration of the time limit.
B. Formal Procedure (Stage Two)
1. Presentation of a formal grievance: Within 15 calendar days after receipt of the Stage One
decision or the expiration of the Stage One time limits (or within 15 calendar days after the
effective date of a final decision of a suspension, separation, or reassignment, all of which
begin at the formal stage, the grievant must present his or her grievance to the Stage Two
Official in the same manner as in the Stage One process and provide a copy of the written
grievance to his or her immediate supervisor, when the grievance begins at the formal stage.
The employee must specifically state in the written grievance presentation that he or she is
making a formal (Stage Two) grievance presentation. There is no entitlement to an oral
grievance presentation, unless otherwise mutually agreed upon by the Stage Two Official
and at the grievant request. Oral grievance presentations must be followed up in writing and
comply with the prescribed time frames. The presentation must furnish sufficient detail to
identify clearly the matter at issue, explain the basis for the grievance, specify the personal
relief requested by the grievant, and should contain all available evidence, documentation,
and argument to support the grievance and to justify the personal relief requested. The
presentation must include a copy of the Stage One grievance presentation (if applicable) and
a copy of the Stage One decision (or state that one was not issued) and should clearly state
the reasons for disagreeing with the Stage One decision, if one was issued.
2. Resolution by Written Agreement: At any time during the formal procedure, the grievance
may be resolved either by a written decision that grants in its entirety the personal relief
HUMAN RESOURCES MANUAL 10
Instruction 771-1: Administrative Grievance Procedure
Issuance Date: 06/05/2008
requested by the grievant, or by a written agreement that is signed by the employee and the
Stage Two Official and made part of the record..
3. Decision Without Factfinding: When there are no substantive facts in dispute, the Stage Two
Official may, at his or her option, proceed to a decision based on the record at hand. A
decision without factfinding shall (after consultation with the Operating Human Resources
Organization): be in writing; state that, because there are no substantive facts in dispute,
factfinding has not been requested; and include a summary of findings and the reason(s) for
the decision.
4. Request for Factfinding: When the Stage Two Official is unable to reach a decision based on
the record at hand; he or she has the option of requesting factfinding and designating an
employee to serve as Factfinder. The Factfinder may be any HHS employee who was not
involved in the matter at issue in the grievance and who is at an appropriate grade level.
Normally, the Factfinder will be another employee who is part of the Stage Two Official’s
organization who is impartial and who is at the same grade level as the Stage One Official or
higher. The Factfinder must not occupy a position subordinate to any official who
recommended, advised, influenced, or made a decision on, or otherwise is or was involved or
has a personal interest in, the matter at issue in the grievance. The designation of an
individual as grievance Factfinder will be made in writing and a copy will be furnished to the
grievant at the time of the designation.
5. Fact-finding Inquiry: The Stage Two Official or his or her designee shall be responsible for
making available space and any other administrative services required that the Factfinder
may need to conduct an appropriate inquiry. At the discretion of the Factfinder, the inquiry
may consist of a documentary review, personal interviews, a group meeting, or any
combination thereof. Factfinders are authorized to take written, signed statements from
individuals who have information pertinent to the grievance. Because the grievance
procedure is purely an administrative process without any further third party review, such
statements need not be sworn or notarized. A simple signature of the individual making the
statement will suffice. The Factfinder will keep the grievance file intact as received from the
Stage Two Official. The Factfinder will only add to the file, not delete from it or rearrange
it. When the Factfinder has completed the inquiry, he or she shall make all documents in the
grievance file available to both the grievant and the Stage One Official (or the Deciding
Official for non-appealable adverse actions and other actions that begin at Stage Two) for
review and written comment, unless they waive opportunity for review and comment.
6. Report of Findings and Recommendations: The Factfinder will normally issue the report to
the Stage Two Official as soon as possible but no later than 60 calendar days after the receipt
of the grievance for factfinding. The report is advisory and any recommendations made are
not binding on the Stage Two Official. The Factfinder shall provide the grievant with a copy
of the report at the same time it is provided to the Stage Two Official.
7. Decision After Examiner's Report: The Stage Two Official shall (after coordination with the
Operating Human Resources Office) issue a written decision to the grievant as soon as
possible, but no later than 30 calendar days after receipt of the Factfinder’s report and the
final grievance file. The decision must include a report of findings and the reasons for the
HUMAN RESOURCES MANUAL 11
Instruction 771-1: Administrative Grievance Procedure
Issuance Date: 06/05/2008
decision. The Stage Two grievance decision is the final decision of the Department of
Health and Human Services in the grievance. There is no right to request reconsideration of
a grievance decision or to appeal to a third party.
771-1-90 REPORTING AND ACCOUNTABILITY
A. OPDIVs and STAFFDIVs are responsible for:
1. Establishing a grievance file at the time the first decision is issued.
2. Ensuring that copies of all relevant materials are added to the file as the processing of the
grievance continues.
3. Ensuring that the employee has the right to submit relevant materials for inclusion in the
official grievance file at both stages of the grievance process.
B. Operating Human Resources Organizations are responsible for:
1. Ensuring compliance with all provisions of this instruction in the processing of
administrative grievances.
2. Retaining the final grievance case file after the Stage Two decision has been rendered or the
grievance has otherwise been closed.
3. Preparing any necessary reports regarding the administrative grievance system.
HUMAN RESOURCES MANUAL 12
Instruction 771-1: Administrative Grievance Procedure
Issuance Date: 06/05/2008
Exhibit A: SAMPLE GRIEVANCE FORMAT
DATE:
FROM:
SUBJECT:
To: Address a Stage One grievance to the first official within the organization with
authority over the matter at issue. If you do not know who that official is, ask
your immediate supervisor or consult with your Human Resources Office.
1. This is a Stage grievance under the (Insert Agency) Administrative
Grievance System.
2. The matter(s) that aggrieve(s) me occurred on [give date(s)] and is/are
described in detail as follows: [Furnish sufficient detail to clearly identify the
matter at issue. Fully explain the basis for your grievance and provide all
available evidence, documentation, and rationale to support your grievance
and the relief that you seek.]
3. The personal relief I seek is: [Specify clearly. If it is already stated or implied
above, restate it here]. [NOTE: "Personal relief" means a specific remedy
directly benefiting you and not an action concerning or against someone else.]
[Signature]
[Attachments: (It is preferable to identify any attachments.)]
[NOTE: It is preferable to make personal delivery when practicable. When mailing is used,
the postmark usually determines the date of filing of the grievance.
HUMAN RESOURCES MANUAL 13
Instruction 771-1: Administrative Grievance Procedure
Issuance Date: 06/05/2008
Exhibit B: SAMPLE DECISION FORMAT
FROM:
SUBJECT: Your Stage Grievance [indicate stage 1 or 2]
TO:
1. I received your Stage grievance on [date].
2. My decision is: [State the decision and include a summary of findings and
the reasons for the decision.]
3. NOTES:
a. If you have no authority over the matter(s) at issue, state that you have
forwarded the grievance to the appropriate official (give name and
address).
b. If the decision is to reject or cancel the grievance, state specifically the
reasons why.
c. If the decision is to grant the personal relief sought, be specific in
describing it to avoid future disputes as to its meaning or
implementation.
d. If the decision is to not grant the personal relief sought, include a
summary of findings and reasons for your decision on the matter(s) at
issue.
e. If this is a Stage One decision, state how the employee may pursue the
matter(s) at the next level.
[Signature]
[Attachments: (it is preferable to identify any attachments.)] 























HHS Anti-Harrassment Policy and Procedure 
HHS Anti‐Harassment Policy and Procedures

I. Introduction:
The Department of Health and Human Services (the “Department” or “HHS”) and its Operating 
and  Staff  Divisions  (“Agency”  or  “Agencies”)  have  an  affirmative  obligation  to  create  and 
maintain a work environment in which employees are  treated with  dignity and respect.   The
environment  must  be  one  of  mutual  trust  and  the  absence  of  intimidation,  bullying  and 
harassment.  In  addition,  the  Secretary’s  Equal  Employment  Opportunity  (EEO)  Policy
incorporates the value of a diverse workforce, the expectation of a safe and secure workplace
free from harassment or fear of reprisal.  Therefore, the Department will not tolerate unlawful 
discrimination or harassment of any kind.  Through enforcement of this policy, the Department 
seeks  to  prevent,  correct  and,  where  it  exists,  eliminate  unacceptable  behavior  that  is 
inconsistent with this policy.
This policy covers all Department and Agency employees, regardless of position.  As such, each
is expected to comply with  this policy and  to  take appropriate measures  to ensure  that he or 
she  does  not  engage  in  the  prohibited  conduct.  Management  will take  appropriate  action 
against any employee who violates this policy.  Appropriate action includes verbal and written 
counseling,  reprimands,  suspensions,  demotion  or  removal  from  one’s  position and  from  the 
Federal Service.   
II. Policy:
In compliance with all applicable federal and state anti‐discrimination and anti‐harassment laws 
and regulations, the Department and its Agencies will enforce this policy in accordance with the 
following definitions, guidelines and procedures: 
Filing  a  complaint  under  these  procedures  is  not  equivalent  to  filing  an  EEO  complaint  of 
discrimination,  under  29  CFR  1614,  or  a  grievance,  under  the  administrative  or  negotiated
procedures noted in the applicable Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA), if any.1
A. Workplace Harassment:
For purposes of  this policy, workplace harassment is defined as any verbal or physical
conduct2 that intimidates or coerces an employee, co‐worker or any person working for
or  on  behalf  of  the  Department.  Verbal  attacks  (including  racial  and  ethnic  slurs  or
derogatory  remarks),  that,  impairs his  or  her  ability  to  perform his or  her  job  are
included in the definition of harassment.
Harassment  of  any  kind,  including  sexual  harassment,  is  prohibited.  Immediate  and 
appropriate  action  will  be  taken  against  any  Department  employee  found  to be  in 
violation of  this policy.  To be unlawful, the conduct must be so severe or repeated or 
pervasive such  that it  creates  a  work environment that  is hostile,  intimidating  or 
offensive to a reasonable person.  For the purpose of these procedures, the “reasonable 
person” standard considers the complainant’s perspective and assesses if a reasonable 
person  exposed  to  the  same  or  similar  circumstances  would  find  the  environment
hostile, intimidating, or offensive.3
B. Definitions:
(1) Workplace harassment is considered to have occurred when: 
(i)	 The  conduct  was  sufficiently  severe  or  pervasive  (e.g.,  a pattern)  enough  to 
create an  environment  that  is  hostile,  or  intimidating  to  a reasonable  person 
exposed to the same or similar circumstances.4
(2) Inappropriate conduct occurs when the complainant has not solicited or invited the 
conduct  and  regards  it  as  unacceptable,  (outside  of work  assignments  or 
instructions) and the complainant is not an active participant in the behavior. Note: 
submission does not mean the conduct was welcomed.  Examples include:
Sexual  advances/pressures  for  dates.  (Violator  must  be  told  that  behavior  is 
unacceptable, or unwelcomed) 
Inappropriate or racial slurs, comments, and innuendos. 
Rude or obnoxious remarks or comments. 
Inappropriate touching. 
Inappropriate gestures, expressions, pictures or graffiti. 
Threats made against others or other threatening behavior. 
Inappropriate communication such as slurs, epithets, ridicule, insults, displaying 
objects,  pictures, graffiti, etc.   This type  of inappropriate communication could 
happen  in  person,  on  the  phone,  through  other  electronic  means  of 
communication, etc. 
(3) Liability attaches if (i) the Department or Agency management knew or should have 
known of the harassment and (ii) failed to take immediate and appropriate action to
investigate the behavior.  Knowledge is assumed if:
The victim complains about harassment to the appropriate official;      
The conduct occurred in the presence of a manager or supervisor and they    were
aware of it; 
The conduct is widespread; or
The complainant put the alleged violator on notice.

III. Roles and Responsibilities:
A. Employee Complainants:
Timely  report incidents of  workplace  harassment to  any  appropriate  HHS 
manager or supervisor.  In cases where the employee’s supervisor, or someone
within the employee’s chain of command, is the offender, employees may file a
complaint with any management official who is outside of the employee’s chain 
of command, if necessary. 
Cooperate fully with management’s investigation of the complaint. 
Report  any  acts of  retaliation  related  to making  a  good  faith  report  of 
harassment, or for assisting with an investigation. 
Be aware that management cannot guarantee confidentiality or anonymity when
investigating a workplace harassment complaint.  Management may be required 
to  inform  those  with  a need‐to‐know  the  details  surrounding  the  workplace
harassment  complaint  or  the  questioning  of  witnesses  may  not  maintain 
confidentiality. 
Take advantage of  the Employee Assistance Program  (EAP) counseling services, 
or  other  personal  counseling  services,  when  necessary,  to  address  personal 
problems relating to the workplace harassment. 
Request  special  accommodations  from  management.  (e.g.,  temporary  parking, 
etc.). 
B. Agency Managers and Supervisors:
Inform  employees  about  policies  and  procedures  for  handling  incidents  of 
workplace harassment. 
Treat all reports of workplace harassment seriously and respond appropriately.

                                                            
HHS Anti‐Harassment Policy and Procedures

Consult  with  a Labor  and  Employee  Relations  (LER)  Specialist  immediately 
regarding  allegations  of  workplace  harassment, irrespective  of  whether  or  not
complainant elects to file a formal complaint.   
Where  required,  timely  investigate  the  alleged  harassment;  documenting  the
investigative findings; taking appropriate action, including disciplinary action, to 
remedy the situation; and, making a good faith effort to prevent future incidents 
from occurring. 
Take  steps  to  prevent  retaliation  against  complainants  who  allege  workplace 
harassment or those who are involved in management inquiries. 
C. Employee Relations:
Advise, guide, and assist supervisors and managers with investigating allegations 
of workplace harassment. 
Recommend solutions, actions and/or discipline, and interim relief for individuals 
alleging workplace harassment. 
Advise managers and  supervisors on  the provisions of  the  collective bargaining
agreement and  other  applicable  laws,  rules,  regulations,  policies,  and 
procedures.
IV. Procedures for Reporting & Adjudicating Violations:
Agency  management  will  handle  all  complaints  submitted  under  this  policy  swiftly  and 
confidentially to the extent possible based on staffing.  Also, lodging a complaint will in no way
be  used  against  the  complainant  or  have  an  impact  on  the  individual’s  employment  status.  
However,  filing  groundless  or  malicious  complaints,  as  determined  by  the  investigator(s),  is
deemed an abuse of  this policy and, thus, will be  treated as a violation. Employees must  still 
maintain acceptable workplace behavior.  
(1) In accordance with  the policies noted under  the Roles and Responsibilities, employees
may file a complaint with any appropriate Agency management official if the violator is 
in the chain of command.
(2) Agency  management  officials,  in  consultation  with  LER,  will  make  a  determination 
regarding whether an official investigation is warranted.6
If yes, determine  scope and  select  the investigative lead.  (Investigators will  follow 
procedures outlined  in  the  collective  bargaining  agreement  for  bargaining  unit 
employees.) 
If no, determine the appropriate action to take and execute.   
(3) Investigator(s)  will  prepare  a  written  report  of  the  findings,  and  submit  it  to  the
6
  Investigation leads may include manager(s), supervisor(s), the HHS Office of the Inspector General (OIG), a
contract investigator or other qualified individuals.  (Note ‐ The particulars of each case will influence who will 
lead the investigation.)

                                                            
HHS Anti‐Harassment Policy and Procedures

appropriate management official(s) and the LER Specialist.7
(4) If supported by  the  findings,  the management official will work with LER  to determine 
appropriate corrective action against the offender or the accuser, or both. 
(5) Management official will notify the complainant when the investigation is complete and 
provide guidance on next steps, if any. 
(6) Management  official  and  LER  will  maintain official  copies  of  the  complaint and
investigative  documents,  including  all  witness  statements  and  findings  report,  in 
accordance with the Department’s Records Retention policy and procedures.  



























610-1
610-1: Establishing and Administering Hours of Duty
Material Transmitted:
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 610-1, Establishing and Administering Hours of Duty, dated December 2, 2021.

Material Superseded:
HHS Instruction 610-1, Establishing and Administering Hours of Duty, dated 05/16/2008

Background:
This Instruction establishes Departmental policy on hours of duty and clarifies roles and responsibilities for administering hours of duty within the Department.  This Instruction has been revised to address Alternative Work Schedules.    

This policy is effective immediately and must be carried out by HHS Operating and Staff Division Heads in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, bargaining agreements, and Departmental policy.

/s/

Michael V. Culpepper
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources and Chief Human Capital Officer, Acting

610-1-00 Sections
610-1-10 Purpose
610-1-20 Coverage and Exclusions
610-1-30 References
610-1-40 Definitions
610-1-50 Responsibilities
610-1-60 Policy
610-1-70 Documentation and Accountability

610-1-10 Purpose
This Instruction implements the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) policy on the establishment of workweeks, work schedules, and related matters in order for HHS to plan and schedule work consistent with the actual work requirements needed to accomplish its mission.    

When provisions of this policy differ from changes in applicable law or regulation, the changes in law or regulation apply.

610-1-20 Coverage and Exclusions
Coverage.
The provisions of this Instruction apply to all HHS employees including Federal Wage System employees.

Exclusions.
Members of the Senior Executive Service (SES);
U.S. Public Health Service (PHS) Commissioned Corps Officers
When the provisions of this Instruction differ from the requirements contained in applicable collective bargaining agreement(s), the collective bargaining agreement takes precedence for bargaining unit employees.
610-1-30 References
Executive Order 11582 (Observance of Holidays by Government Agencies, February 11, 1971)
5 U.S.C. §§ 6101-6133 (Hours of Work)
5 C.F.R. Part 610 (Hours of Duty)
5 C.F.R. Part 630 (Absence and Leave)
HHS Instruction 630-1 (Leave and Excused Absences), issued December 17, 2010
HHS Guide for Timekeeping, October 2018 
610-1-40 Definitions
Administrative Workweek.  Any period of seven (7) consecutive 24-hour periods as designated in advance by the Secretary or his/her designee(s). See 610-1-60 below.
Alternative Work Schedule (AWS).  Refers to flexible and compressed work schedules.
Basic Work Requirement.  The number of hours, excluding overtime hours, an employee is required to work or to account for by leave or otherwise. 
Compressed Work Schedule (CWS).  For full-time employees, an 80-hour biweekly basic work requirement which is scheduled for less than 10 workdays. For part-time employees, a biweekly basic work requirement of less than 80 hours which is scheduled for less than 10 workdays.
Core Hours.   The designated hours and days during which an employee on a flexible work schedule must be present for work, as designated by the Operating Divisions/Staff Divisions (OpDiv/StaffDivs) Heads.
Credit Hours. For employees on a flexible work schedule, any hours that an employee elects to work in excess of his or her basic work requirement so as to vary the length of a workweek or workday.  Full time employees on a flexible work schedule may accumulate not more than 24 credit hours, and  part-time employees may accumulate not more than one-fourth (1/4) of the hours in their bi-weekly basic work requirement, for carryover from a biweekly pay period to a succeeding biweekly pay period. Credit hours in excess of 24 hours are forfeited and do not entitle the employee to overtime compensation. Credit hours may not be earned or used by employees working under a compressed schedule. 
Flexible Work Schedule (FWS).  A work schedule which includes both 1) core hours; and 2) designated hours during which an employee may elect the time of such employee’s arrival at and departure from work as designated by OpDiv/StaffDivs.
Overtime Hours.  When used with respect to FWS programs, all hours in excess of 8 hours in a day or 40 hours in a week which are officially ordered in advance, but does not include credit hours.  With respect to full-time employees in CWS programs, any hours worked in excess of those specified hours which constitute the compressed work schedule.  With respect to part-time employees in CWS programs, overtime  pay shall begin to be paid after the same number of hours of work after which a full-time employee on a similar schedule would begin to receive overtime pay. Refer to HHS Instruction 550-1, “Premium Pay.”
Regularly Scheduled Administrative Workweek.  For full-time employees, it is the period within an administrative workweek within which an employee is regularly scheduled to work.  For part-time employees, it is the officially prescribed days and hours within an administrative workweek during which an employee is regularly scheduled to work.
Regularly Scheduled Work.  Work that is scheduled in advance of an administrative workweek.
Tour of Duty.  The hours of a day (a daily tour of duty) and the days of an administrative workweek (a weekly tour of duty) that constitute an employee’s regularly scheduled administrative workweek.
610-1-50 Responsibilities
HHS Assistant Secretary for Administration, Office of Human Resources (ASA/OHR):
Develops Department-wide human resources guidance and policy consistent with HHS and OPM policy, procedures and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Periodically reviews Operating Division and Staff Division (OpDiv/StaffDiv) procedures to assure conformance with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Heads (reference in this document to action by OpDiv/StaffDivs means the OpDiv/StaffDiv Heads):
Comply with this Instruction, and applicable federal laws and regulations.
Designate core hours for their respective OpDiv/StaffDivs.
Establish and publish supplemental policy on the regularly scheduled administrative workweek for full-time employees that includes a 40-hour basic workweek consisting of five (5) consecutive, 8-hour days, including the hours of duty.
When it is impracticable to prescribe a regular schedule of definite hours of duty for each workday of a regularly scheduled administrative workweek, OpDiv/StaffDivs may establish the first 40 hours of duty performed within a period of not more than 6 days of the administrative workweek as the basic workweek. A first 40-hour tour of duty is the basic workweek without the requirement for specific days and hours within the administrative workweek.  All work performed by an employee within the first 40 hours is considered regularly scheduled work for premium pay and hours of duty purposes. Any additional hours of officially ordered or approved work within the administrative workweek are overtime work. See 5 C.F.R. 610.111(b) and HHS Instruction 550-1, “Premium Pay.” 
Ensure that regularly scheduled overtime is used prudently and that it is requested in writing and approved in advance of the administrative workweek, where practicable. 
Track and record hours worked, leave usage, overtime, credit hours, compensatory time and other forms of paid and non-paid duty status.
Authorize variations in work schedules for educational purposes and other circumstances consistent with mission objectives and applicable laws and regulations.
Approve, modify, or terminate alternative work schedules in accordance with laws, regulations, HHS policy and applicable collective bargaining agreements.
Supervisors and Managers:
Approve or modify individual employee work schedules based on their assessment of the needs of the office and each employee's conduct and performance, and in order to accommodate, whenever reasonable and practicable, the employee's preferred arrival and departure times. Supervisors monitor staff attendance and work practices to determine the impact of the staff schedules on the functioning of the office.  As a result of such monitoring or assessments, supervisors may restrict, modify, or cancel an employee's participation in AWS.
Direct changes in work schedules or modifications when necessary to meet operational needs of the organization or when the employee deviates from his or her approved work schedule.
Ensure requests for changes in work schedules are approved in a fair and equitable manner.
Employees
Report to work on time and adhere to the stipulated hours and days of work in accordance with their approved work schedule.
Understand performance standards and abide by rules of conduct which factor into decisions associated with alternative work schedules.
610-1-60 Policy
Weekly and Daily Scheduling of Work. 
Basic Workweek
HHS shall observe an administrative workweek that consists of seven (7) consecutive calendar days which run from 12:01 a.m. Sunday to 12:00 midnight Saturday.
The basic workweek, for full-time employees, shall consist of 40-hours over five (5) consecutive days.
The regularly scheduled administrative workweek shall be from Monday through Friday, eight (8) hours per day with two consecutive days off on Saturday and Sunday. 
The official hours of duty during the basic workweek are from 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., which includes a 30-minute meal break that is generally taken between 11:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m., except as otherwise provided within the respective collective bargaining agreement.  The meal break must be taken daily and cannot be forgone in order to shorten the daily tour of duty, unless an exception is approved by an authorized management official.  OpDiv/StaffDivs may vary the official hours of duty, the length of the meal break, and the timeframe during which meal breaks may be taken based on mission requirements and consistent with applicable law, regulations, HHS policies and applicable collective bargaining agreements.
Under 610-1-50(B) above, OpDiv/StaffDivs may prescribe certain exceptions to the basic workweek.
Types of Alternative Work Schedules
Compressed Work Schedule.   In the case of a full-time employee, an 80-hour biweekly basic work requirement that is scheduled for less than 10 workdays.  In the case of a part-time employee, a biweekly basic work requirement of less than 80 hours that is scheduled for less than 10 workdays.  Employees on a Compressed Work Schedule are not entitled to credit hours.  
OpDiv/StaffDivs are responsible for establishing the CWSs available for their OpDiv/StaffDivs and may choose to establish either, or both, or none of the following available CWS options:

Five day/four day compressed plan (5-4/9)
A full-time employee works eight 9-hour days and one 8-hour day for a total of 80 hours in a biweekly pay period.  The employee has one (1) day off each biweekly pay period.  The OpDiv/StaffDiv determines the number of hours each day a part-time employee must work in a 9-day biweekly pay period.
Four-day Work Week (4/10)
In the case of a full-time employee who works a four-day workweek, the employee must work 10 hours a day, 40 hours a week and 80 hours in a biweekly pay period.  In the case of a part-time employee who works a four-day workweek, the OpDiv/StaffDivs will determine the number of hours each day a part-time employee must work in a four-day workweek and the number of hours in a biweekly pay period.
Flexible Work Schedule.  In the case of a full-time employee, has an 80-hour biweekly basic work requirement that includes both 1) core hours; and 2) designated hours during which the employee may elect the time of such employee’s arrival at and departure from work. In the case a part-time employee, has a biweekly basic work requirement of less than 80 hours that includes both 1) core hours; and 2) designated hours during which the employee may elect the time of such employee’s arrival at and departure from work. For both full-time and part-time employees, the OpDiv/StaffDivs shall designate both 1) the core hours; and 2) the hours during which employees may elect to arrive at and depart from work. Employees on a flexible work schedule are entitled to credit hours.

OpDiv/StaffDivs are responsible for establishing the FWSs available for their OpDiv/StaffDivs and may choose to establish one, two, three, or all of the following available options, or may choose not to establish any of the following options:
Gliding Schedule:  A type of flexible work schedule in which a full-time employee has a basic work requirement of 8 hours in each day and 40 hours in each week, and may select a starting and stopping time each day, and may change starting and stopping times daily within the established flexible hours.  For example:
Image
Gliding Schedule: This graphic shows a gliding schedule with flexible hours at 7 to 9am and 3 to 6 pm, and core hours plus lunch period from 9 am to 3 pm. Customer Service Hours from 7:30 am to 4 pm.
Flexitour Schedule. A type of flexible work schedule in which an employee is allowed to select starting and stopping times within the flexible hours.  Once selected, the hours are fixed until the OpDiv/StaffDiv provides an opportunity to select different starting and stopping times. For example:
Image
Flexitour Schedule: This graphic shows a flexitour schedule with flexible hours at 6 to 9 a.m. and 3 to 5 p.m., and core hours plus lunch period from 9 a.m. to 3 p.m.
Variable Week Schedule.  A type of flexible work schedule containing core hours on each workday in the biweekly pay period and in which a full-time employee has a basic work requirement of 80 hours for the biweekly pay period, but in which an employee may vary the number of hours worked on a given workday or the number of hours each week within the limits established by the OpDiv/StaffDivs.  Below is an example of what a variable week schedule might look like.  The basic work requirement is 80 hours and the employee worked 2 credit hours.
Variable Week Schedule - Week 1

Image
Variable Week Schedule, Week 1: This graphic shows week 1 of a variable week schedule with core hours (plus lunch period) from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. Hours worked: 10 on Monday, 9 on Tuesday, 10 on Wednesday, 8 on Thursday, and 8 on Friday for a total of 45 hours worked.
Variable Week Schedule - Week 2

Image
Variable Week Schedule, Week 2: This graphic shows week 2 of a variable week schedule with core hours (plus lunch period) from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. Hours worked: 7 on Monday, 8 on Tuesday, 8 on Wednesday, 6 on Thursday, and 8 on Friday for a total of 37 hours worked.
Maxiflex.  A type of flexible work schedule that contains core hours on fewer than 10 workdays in the biweekly pay period, but in which an employee may vary the number of hours worked on a given workday or the number of hours each week within the limits established by the OpDiv/StaffDivs.  Below is an example of what a maxiflex schedule might look like.  The basic work requirement is 80 hours and the employee worked 2 credit hours.
Maxiflex Schedule

Image
Maxiflex Schedule, Week 1: This graphic shows week 1 of a maxiflex schedule with core hours (plus lunch period) from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. Hours worked: 10 on Monday, 9 on Tuesday, 10 on Wednesday, 8 on Thursday, and 8 on Friday for a total of 45 hours worked.
Maxiflex Schedule

Image
Maxiflex Schedule - Week 2: This graphic shows week 2 of a maxiflex schedule with core hours (plus lunch period) from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. Hours worked: 0 on Monday, 7 on Tuesday, 10 on Wednesday, 10 on Thursday, and 10 on Friday for a total of 37 hours worked.
Leave
Leave or Other Excused Absence. AWS has no effect on an employee's right to use annual or sick leave.  All requirements for the advanced approval of non-emergency leave remain in effect.  Responsibilities of employees and supervisors with regard to requesting and approving or disapproving leave, both annual and sick, remain the same. Time off during an employee's basic workweek or AWS must be charged to an appropriate leave category, compensatory time off, credit hours, or other excused absence.  Approved leave taken for the entire day will be charged according to the number of hours that would normally have been worked.  If an AWS employee uses annual or sick leave on a day the employee was otherwise scheduled to work, the employee must be charged leave for the total number of hours required by the work schedule on that day.  Excused absence may be granted to employees on AWS under the same circumstances as with employees on other work schedules.  Refer to HHS Instruction 630-1, “Leave and Excused Absence,” for HHS policy on use of leave and excused absence.
Holidays
5 U.S.C. § 6103  and Executive Order 11582 govern the identification and determination of holidays.  However, when a holiday, designated as such by Federal statute or Executive order,  falls on a regular weekly scheduled non-work day, the day to be treated as a holiday for pay and leave purposes (the “in-lieu-of” holiday) will be determined as follows:
When a holiday occurs on a Saturday, the Friday immediately before is a legal holiday for employees whose basic workweek is Monday through Friday;
When the actual holiday falls on a Sunday, the legal holiday will be the following workday (Monday for most employees). 
For an employee whose basic workweek is other than Monday through Friday, when the actual holiday occurs on a regular weekly non-workday, except the regular weekly non-workday administratively scheduled for the employee instead of Sunday, the legal or in-lieu-of holiday is the workday immediately before the actual holiday.
Part-time CWS and FWS employees are not entitled to an in-lieu-of holiday.  
For federal employees who have duty posts outside the US, and who have a basic workweek other than Monday through Friday, and are regularly scheduled to work on Monday, their legal public (or in-lieu-of) holiday is the first workday of the workweek in which the Monday designated for the observance of the holiday occurs. 5 U.S.C. 6103(b)(3) 
Federal employees in the Washington DC area are entitled to a holiday on the day a President is inaugurated (January 20 following a Presidential election).  Employees are entitled to this holiday if they are employed in: District of Columbia, Montgomery and Prince Georges Counties in Maryland; Arlington and Fairfax Counties in Virginia; and the cities of Alexandria and Falls Church in Virginia.  Pursuant to 5 U.S.C. § 6103(c) , when January 20 “falls on Sunday, the next succeeding day selected for the public observance of the inauguration of the President is a legal public holiday for purpose of” pay and leave.
Full-Time Employees who are authorized to work a flexible work schedule who are relieved or prevented from working on a day designated as a holiday by Federal statute or Executive order are entitled to pay with respect to that day for eight (8) hours. If the President issues an Executive Order granting a half-day holiday, a full-time employee on a flexible work schedule is credited with half the number of hours he/she was scheduled to work, not to exceed four (4) hours. 
Full-Time Employees who are authorized to work a compressed work schedule and who are relieved or prevented from working on a day designated as a holiday by Federal statute or Executive Order are entitled to basic pay for the number of hours of the compressed work schedule on that day.  For example, if an employee is scheduled to work a 9 or 10-hour workday, the employee’s holiday is 9 or 10 hours respectively.  If the President authorizes a half-day holiday, a full-time employee on a compressed work schedule is entitled to basic pay for half the number of hours he/she would otherwise work on that day. 
Part-time employees on a flexible work schedule who are relieved or prevented from working on a day within the employee’s scheduled tour of duty that is designed as a holiday by Federal statute or Executive Order, are entitled to receive basic pay with respect to the holiday for the number of hours they are regularly scheduled to work on that day, not to exceed 8 hours.
Part-time employees on a compressed work schedule who are relieved or prevented from working on a day within their scheduled tour of duty that is designated as a holiday by Federal statute or Executive order are entitled to basic pay for the number of hours of the compressed work schedule on that day.
Part-time CWS and FWS employees are not entitled to an in-lieu-of day off when a holiday falls on a non-work day for the employee.
If an employee has two basic workdays (i.e., two basic scheduled tours of duty) that overlap a single holiday, the employee is entitled to a holiday only for the tour of duty that commences (i.e., begins) on the holiday. The entire workday that begins on the holiday must be treated as if it fell on the holiday.
Meal Breaks
A meal break is an approved period of time in a non-pay and non-work status that interrupts a basic workday or a period of overtime work for the purpose of allowing an employee to eat or engage in personal activities.  Employees who work five (5) or more hours in a day are allocated a 30-minute meal break.  Employees must take a meal break and may not save any part of the thirty (30) minutes in order to leave early or extend subsequent meal periods, unless an exception is authorized by the supervisor or other authorized approving management official.
At the discretion of OpDiv/StaffDiv Heads, and subject to applicable collective bargaining agreements, management may authorize a brief period of paid work-time off of 15 minutes or less to improve organizational and employee proficiency.  However, breaks may not be scheduled immediately before or after a meal break or at the start or end of the workday, and may not be accumulated for use at a later time or in lieu of paid leave.
Employees may request supervisory approval to extend the meal period and make up the difference either at the beginning or ending of the same day.
An employee must be excused from job duties during his/her meal break. However, if an employee is recalled to job duties before the authorized meal break ends, the employee is entitled to be paid for compensable work in accordance with applicable law and regulation.
610-1-70 Documentation and Accountability
Records including all documentation sufficient for third party reconstruction purposes, must be retained according to the record disposition schedule.  Generally, records created in a given year must be retained for a total of three (3) full years. 
Records involved in litigation and grievance processes may be destroyed only after official notification is received from OPM, Department of Justice, courts, or the Office of the General Counsel, etc. that the matter has been fully litigated, or resolved and closed.
ASA/OHR may conduct periodic accountability reviews to analyze compliance with this Instruction, HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and applicable federal laws and regulations.























610-2
Material Transmitted:

Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 610-2, Temporary Closing of Workplaces and Treatment of Absences, dated May 30, 2008.

Material Superseded:

HHS Instruction 610-2, Temporary Closing of Workplaces and Treatment of Absences, dated February 27, 1997.

Background:
This Instruction has been superseded to bring it into compliance with the current law and regulations pertaining to Hours of Duty and Absence and Leave.  This policy update removes all subject policy pertaining to inside the Washington Capital Beltway since the subject is covered separately under the Washington, DC Dismissal and Closure Procedures; clarifies employees who are covered under this policy; and establishes policy and procedures regarding roles and responsibilities of ASAM, OHR, OPDIV Heads, operating Human Resources organizations, and HHS employees.

In addition, the instruction highlights designation procedures and crucial functions of emergency and mission-critical emergency employees; updates changes in the policies on absences based on temporary closures due to an emergency or administrative situation; and updates changes to leave to address the unique situations arising from AWS and telework schedules.

This issuance is effective immediately.  Implementation under this issuance must be carried out in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, bargaining agreements, and Departmental policy.



						Antonia T. Harris
						Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources
						


INSTRUCTION 610-2
 
SUBJECT: 	TEMPORARY CLOSING OF WORKPLACES AND TREATMENT OF ABSENCES

610-2-00	Purpose
610-2-10	References 
610-2-20	Definitions
610-2-30	Coverage and Exclusions
610-2-40	Responsibilities
610-2-50	Emergency and Mission Critical Emergency Employees
610-2-60	General Provisions
610-2-70	Excused Absences and Charges to Leave
610-2-80	Reporting and Accountability

Exhibit A	Treatment of Absences and Charges to Leave 
Exhibit B	Additional Provisions for Alternate Work Schedule (AWS) Employees

610-2-00	PURPOSE
This Instruction sets forth the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) policy and procedures on dismissals, temporary closing of work places, and the treatment of absences during these closings in accordance with references (A) through (F).
The policies and procedures apply to situations that prevent significant numbers of HHS employees from reporting for work on time or which require HHS entities to close all or part of their activities, i.e., severe weather conditions, natural disasters; incidents causing disruptions to Department operations (power and/or water outages, disruption of public transportation, etc.); and other emergencies (terrorist attacks, exposure to biohazards, continuity of operations, etc.).

610-2-10	REFERENCES
A.	5 USC § 61, Hours of Work
B.	5 USC § 63, Leave
C.	5 CFR, Part 610, Hours of Duty
D.	5 CFR, Part 630, Absence and Leave
E.	U.S. Office of Personnel Management (USOPM), Washington, D.C., Area Dismissal or Closure Procedures, December 2007
F.	USOPM Handbook on Pay and Leave Benefits for Federal Employees Affected by Severe Weather Conditions or Other Emergency Situations, July 2007


610-2-20	DEFINITIONS
For purposes of this Instruction, the following terms have the meanings indicated: 
A.	Delayed Arrival Permits non-emergency employees to be granted excused absence (administrative leave) for a specified number of hours past their normal arrival time at work. For example, if non-emergency employees are authorized to report for work two (2) hours past their normal arrival time of 7:00 a.m., employees should plan their commute in order to arrive at the work site by 9:00 a.m.  An employee who arrives later than 9:00 a.m. will be charged annual leave for the excess time, unless a specific exception is granted.  Individuals designated as emergency employees are expected to report to work on time.
B.	Early Dismissal Permits non-emergency employees to be granted excused absence for the number of hours remaining in their workday beyond their designated early dismissal time.  Non-emergency employees are dismissed relative to their designated departure times from work. If a 3-hour early dismissal is authorized as a result of inclement weather, non-emergency employees who would normally leave work at 5:00 p.m. would be authorized to leave at 2:00 p.m.  Individuals designated as emergency or mission critical employees are expected to remain at work until their scheduled times of departure, unless directed otherwise.
C.	Alternative Work Schedules (AWS) Pertain to employees who work a fixed compressed work schedule or a flexible work schedule. For purposes of this Instruction, this definition also includes flexitime and all other variations.  For employees on gliding schedules, delayed arrival would typically be based on the employee's most typical or frequent arrival time at work.  Early dismissal would be based on the time the employee had planned to leave work on the day in which the early dismissal is authorized if the employee had been able to work a full day.
D.	Administrative Order An order issued by an authorized official during brief (not to exceed 3 consecutive days) emergency situations that excuses non-emergency employees from work without charge to leave or loss of pay.   Employees designated as emergency or mission critical are generally not relieved from duty during an emergency.  An Administrative Order is not appropriate in situations of extensive duration or periods of suspended operations where leave could be scheduled, employees furloughed or assigned other work. 
E.	Administrative Situations  May involve severe weather conditions, natural disaster, power outages, major equipment failures impacting major operations or services (e.g., electricity, heat, air conditioning) or  unforeseen circumstances (e.g., fire, broken water main, bomb threat) that require relieving employees temporarily from duty at one or more HHS facilities.
F.	Disabled Employees Under the Rehabilitation Act, a disabled person is defined as someone who has a physical or mental impairment which prevents them from performing major life activities without assistance, including care taking functions such as bathing, clothing, or other manual tasks.  The disability may be permanent or temporary.  The Rehabilitation Act prohibits discrimination on the basis of disability in programs conducted by Federal agencies, in programs receiving Federal financial assistance, in Federal employment, and in the employment practices of Federal contractors.
G.	Emergency Employees A general category of individuals who have been designated by management as critical to agency operations during a dismissal, closure, or other emergency situation (i.e. response/continuity of operations plans). Emergency employees may be members of other groups (e.g. Continuity of Operations Emergency Relocation Group) or have other designations (e.g. Mission Critical Emergency Employees). 
H.	Emergency Situations  May result in commuting delays, prevent employees in significant numbers from reporting to work, or necessitate the closing of several Federal activities in the same geographical area (e.g., heavy snow, severe icing conditions, floods, earthquakes, hurricanes, air pollution, power failures, interruption of public transportation, acts of terror, etc.).
I.	Fixed Work Schedule A work schedule that is fixed with a designated time of arrival and departure.
J.	Gliding Schedule A type of flexible work schedule in which a full-time employee has a basic work requirement of 8 hours in each day and 40 hours in each week, may select a starting and stopping time each day, and may change starting and stopping times daily within the established flexible hours. 
K.	Mission Critical Emergency Employees Emergency employees (e.g., continuity of operations or emergency relocation group personnel) who have been designated by management as critical to agency operations, who are expected to remain at the worksite during a dismissal or closure unless directed otherwise.  Mission critical emergency employees may be required to remain in contact and accessible to management during an emergency or closure.  
L.	Temporary Closing  The closing, in whole or in part, of a work place and the excusing of employees' absence for short periods of time because of an emergency or administrative situation.
M.	Telework Employee An employee who is officially authorized to work at an alternate work site, either at home or at an authorized “telecommuting” facility.
N.	Unscheduled Leave Policy  A policy announced by OPM or other appropriate management official which allows non-emergency employees, who are unable to report for work, to request unscheduled leave for their entire scheduled workday.  Employees must notify their supervisors of their intent to take unscheduled leave. 

610-2-30	COVERAGE AND EXCLUSIONS
A.	The provisions of this Instruction apply to all HHS employees who are subject to the leave provisions under Subchapter 1, Chapter 63 of Title 5, U.S. Code, with the exception of private sector employees and contractors.  HHS employees inside the Washington, D.C.  Capital Beltway are subject to the Washington, D.C., Area Dismissal or Closure Procedures of the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) and this Instruction.  These procedures are posted on the internet at http://www.opm.gov/oca/compmemo/dismissal.pdf.  Heads of Operating Divisions, or designees outside of the Washington, D.C. area, are authorized to develop local dismissal or closure policies and procedures consistent with this Instruction and OPM requirements.
B.	When the provisions of a negotiated labor/management agreement differ from the provisions of this Instruction, the agreement takes precedence for those employees covered by a negotiated labor/management agreement.

610-2-40	RESPONSIBILITIES
A.	Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management (ASAM) or his/her designee is responsible for:
1.	Serving as liaison with OPM on the Washington, D.C., Area Dismissal or Closure Procedures, or any other matter relating to the closure of HHS facilities.
2.	Approving Administrative Orders proposed by Operating Division (OPDIV) Heads that relieve employees from duty without charge to leave in excess of three (3) consecutive work days in a single period of excused absence.
B.	Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management (ASAM), Office of Human Resources (OHR)  is responsible for:
1.	Updating and maintaining this policy.
2.	Providing guidance to operating Human Resources organizations (OHROs) regarding the temporary closure of work places and the treatment of absences when temporary closures occur.
C.	OPDIV Heads are responsible for:
1.	Making decisions and issuing administrative orders on the closure of work places outside the Washington, D.C. area for emergency or administrative reasons within the parameters outlined in this Instruction.  This authority may be redelegated to the head of a local facility or entity, as necessary (e.g., Regional Director, District Director, Area Director, etc.)
2.	Complying with OPM’s Dismissal or Closure Procedures for emergency or administrative reasons for work places within the Washington D.C. area and supplementing those procedures as necessary to accomplish mission objectives.  
3.	Developing and implementing a local closure or dismissal procedures that may be necessary to supplement the Washington, D.C., Area Dismissal or Closure Procedures or this Instruction.
4.	Designating an official to serve as liaison with any local Federal Executive Board (FEB).  In locations with several Federal installations, an FEB or similar association of Federal agencies may develop specific procedures to assure equitable treatment of all Federal employees in the area.  In such cases, the chairperson of the association usually issues administrative orders through the media or through a central notification medium such as the one used by OPM for the Washington, D.C. area. 
5.	Consulting with other HHS organizations, as required.  Occasionally, there may be a widespread situation affecting several HHS work places with no central heads of HHS installations located in close proximity to assure consistency.  In those cases, heads of HHS work places (e.g., OPDIV Heads or their designees located in a given commuting area) are expected to consult with local transportation, media, Federal Executive Boards and Federal Executive Associations to develop local plans to ensure that affected employees are treated as consistently as possible.
6.	Designating emergency and mission critical emergency employees as deemed appropriate, based on mission requirements, who are expected to report to work regardless of any administrative closure or dismissal, and ensuring that the employees are notified of their designation as emergency or mission critical emergency employees at least annually, as well as prior to an announced closure or dismissal.  Mission critical emergency employees must be notified of the emergency situations in which they are expected to report for work or remain at work and said policy must be in writing.
7.	Ensuring that the applicable closure or dismissal procedures are disseminated annually and are made available to all OPDIV employees
D.	Operating Human Resources Organizations are responsible for providing advice and guidance to managers within their serviced organizations as necessary on the interpretation of the closure or dismissal procedures and the rules pertaining to leave and excused absence during a closure or dismissal.
E.	HHS Employees are responsible for:
1.	Monitoring appropriate media for administrative closure or dismissal announcements for their area.
2.	Taking reasonable steps (e.g., leaving home early or using public transportation rather than a personal car) to minimize the potential effects of inclement weather or other emergencies on the ability to report for work.
3.	Notifying their immediate supervisors or other appropriate management official(s) of their intentions to take unscheduled leave when an unscheduled leave policy has been announced.  While non-emergency employees are not required to obtain supervisory approval when an unscheduled leave policy is in effect, employees are required to notify supervisors of their intentions to take leave.  


610-2-50	EMERGENCY AND MISSION CRITICAL EMERGENCY EMPLOYEES
A.	Employees who are officially designated as “emergency” or “mission critical emergency” are expected to report for duty or remain on duty in the event of a closure, dismissal, or unscheduled leave announcement, unless specifically directed otherwise.  
B.	There are no standard definitions or categories of positions that must be designated as emergency or mission critical emergency.  Each OPDIV is authorized to designate those employees judged to be essential to continue operations in a dismissal, closure or emergency situation.  The designation of emergency employees should be part of an OPDIV’s published emergency response or Continuity Of Operations Plan (COOP).
C.	Employees who are designated as emergency or mission critical emergency should be notified of such designation in writing in advance of any requirement to report for duty in an administrative or emergency situation. 
D.	Emergency or mission critical emergency employees are expected to report for duty on time and remain at work during a closure or dismissal unless directed otherwise.  Emergency or mission critical emergency employees may be excused by OPDIV Head or his/her designee when it is determined that circumstances justify excused absence.  However, mission critical emergency employees may have a further requirement to remain in contact with management during an emergency for instructions to report for work should the need arise.
E.	Employees who are required to work during their regular tour of duty when the workplace is closed or when other employees are allowed to arrive late or leave early are not entitled to receive overtime pay, credit hours, or compensatory time for performing work during their regularly scheduled hours of duty.  If an emergency or mission critical emergency employee, who is required to work, fails to report for duty without adequate reason, he/she may be placed in an absence without leave (AWOL) status.  In such circumstances, AWOL may serve as grounds for progressive disciplinary action.

610-2-60	GENERAL PROVISIONS
A.	If there is no announcement, HHS employees are to assume that their work place is open each scheduled tour of duty regardless of any conditions that may develop.   Employees are also to assume that they are expected to report for duty on time and remain throughout their scheduled tour of duty unless they are on previously approved leave.  Employees working on shifts are to operate on these same assumptions unless they are notified that their specific shifts are affected.
B.	All employees are expected to report to work and depart from work at their regularly scheduled times in spite of weather conditions and traffic and transportation disruptions, unless an Administrative Order or dismissal is issued by an authorized official.  Each employee is expected to take whatever steps are necessary (e.g., leaving home early or using public transportation rather than a personal car) to cope with disruptive conditions.
C.	The authority to close the work place is to be used sparingly and only for short periods of time not to exceed three (3) consecutive work days.  If it becomes necessary to exceed the 3-consecutive day limitation, approval must be obtained from the ASAM or his/her designee. 
D.	Management officials must exercise sound judgment in determining when to close, how long to remain closed, and how much excused absence to approve.  Although the use of an unscheduled leave policy is encouraged during emergency situations, management may need to make exceptions to general procedures as circumstances warrant.  
E.	Annually, OPDIV Heads or their designees must advise all employees under their jurisdiction how closings will be handled due to severe weather conditions or other emergencies.  Annual notices should include the following: 
1.  What constitutes an official announcement;
2.  When possible, which television and radio stations will issue official announcements;
3.  What hours constitute the fixed work schedule;
4.  How shifts will be handled;
5.  How employees working AWS hours are affected;
6.  Usual wording of announcements and what that wording means;
7.  Anything else that will help employees know what to do when such situations occur.
F.	Administrative Orders may be issued orally but must be confirmed in writing to provide documentation and to justify excusing absences.
G.	When an Administrative Order is issued that authorizes a delayed arrival, non-emergency employees are expected to report for work in accordance with the Administrative Order.  Tardiness in excess of the authorized excused absence is generally charged to annual leave, compensatory time or credit hours earned. 
H.	In emergency situations, supervisors should be sensitive to the needs of disabled employees.  For example, snow removal equipment may make travel by mobility-impaired individuals even more difficult by creating insurmountable snow drifts at walkways.  Employees with the same disability may have different needs, and an employee’s needs may vary on different occasions, even under similar weather and environmental conditions.  
I.	Management must identify in writing individuals who are designated as mission critical emergency employees, and the conditions under which they are considered to be mission critical emergency employees and advise them of their status on an annual basis.  If management determines that a situation requires nonemergency personnel to report to or remain at work, OPDIV Heads or their designees must establish procedures for notifying affected employees.
J.	Occasionally, some individual employees may face special family situations that will not be covered by an announcement in the media or on OPM's web site (e.g., when employees are expected to report to work, but the schools opened late or are closed).  Management should notify employees of procedures to be followed when this occurs and should be flexible in approving excused absence or leave as appropriate, based on each unique situation. 

610-2-70	EXCUSED ABSENCES AND CHARGES TO LEAVE
A.	OPDIV heads or their designees are authorized to approve Administrative Orders for brief absences that do not exceed three (3) consecutive days consistent with OPM requirements and this Instruction.  They are likewise authorized to approve brief absences, that do not involve group dismissals or closures [generally up to one (1) work day], on a case by case basis when deemed appropriate.
B.	In general, when it is necessary for an official to issue an Administrative Order to close the work place temporarily, nonemergency employee absences are excused.  Exhibit A describes a variety of specific situations and their effect on charges to leave.  Officials must recognize that when they issue an Administrative Order authorizing an unscheduled leave policy during a temporary emergency, they are authorizing all employees, except those designated as emergency or mission critical emergency employees, to take annual leave or LWOP without prior approval from their supervisors.  While employees must notify their supervisors of their intentions to take unscheduled leave, supervisors may not deny that leave once an administrative order has been issued.  Therefore, authorized officials should be cautious in issuing administrative orders that permit the taking of annual leave or LWOP during temporary emergency situations.
C.	Employees on telework arrangements, who either work at home or at an alternate telework site, are generally required to remain in a duty status during a dismissal or closure at the official duty station.  This requirement must be documented in the employee’s telework agreement. However, an employee on telework may be excused during an emergency if the emergency adversely affects the employee’s ability to perform assigned work e.g., disruption of electricity, loss of heat, job requires close and constant contact with employees at the official worksite, etc.  However, telework employees who are required to work during their regular tour of duty when the workplace is closed or when others are allowed to arrive late or leave early are not entitled to receive overtime pay, credit hours, or compensatory time for performing work during their regularly scheduled hours.
610-1-80	  REPORTING AND ACCOUNTABILITY
OPDIV Heads are responsible for maintaining records containing the names of employees designated as emergency and mission critical emergency employees, copies of written notification to employees informing them of their designation, and the OPDIV’s expectations during a dismissal or closure.  In addition, records shall be maintained on all closures or dismissals, to include copies of Administrative Orders, timekeeping records documenting excused absences, and any other pertinent information. 
Exhibit A - TREATMENT OF ABSENCES AND CHARGES TO LEAVE

When the work place is closed temporarily because of an emergency or an administrative situation, the table below shows how to charge leave or excuse absences.

I.  If an early dismissal policy is announced during work hours... 

AND the employee is...	THEN the absence is charged to...

at work at the time of dismissal.	excused absence, even if the employee was scheduled to take leave later in the day.
on approved leave but is expected to return to work after the announcement of an early dismissal policy but before his or her authorized departure time.	The approved leave up to the time of dismissal and excused absence following the employee's authorized departure time, even if the employee is scheduled to take leave later in the day.

Example: Employee usually works 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., takes 4 hours of annual leave from 8:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. A storm closes the work place at 11:30 a.m.

The employee is charged 3 (not 4) hours of annual leave from 8:30 a.m. to 11:30 a.m. and excused absence from 11:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
is scheduled to report to work before the dismissal but fails to do so.	annual leave, sick leave, LWOP, or AWOL, as appropriate, for the entire work day.
at work when the closing time is announced and goes on approved leave before the time is set for dismissal.


	
	leave or LWOP only from the time the employee left until the announced dismissal time and excused absence for the rest of the day.

Example A: Employee usually works from 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. and is told at 9:30 a.m. that the work place will close at 11:30 a.m.  Employee requests and goes on approved annual leave from 10:30 a.m. to 11:30 a.m. and is on excused absence for the rest of the day. 
at work and leaves before official word of the pending dismissal is received.	leave, LWOP, or AWOL for the rest of the day. 

Example:  Employee works from 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., and decides to leave work at 9:30 a.m. on approved leave, LWOP, or unapproved leave.  The dismissal order is received by the agency after the employee has left.  The employee is charged annual leave, LWOP or AWOL status for the rest of the day from 9:30 a.m. 
on approved leave when official dismissal is announced and is expected to be on leave for the rest of the day anyway (this includes employees on AWS day off).	the leave or AWS credit hours the employee is already on. Example:  Employee is on annual leave all of the pay period.  A storm closes the work place early on Tuesday.  The employee is charged annual leave.

II.	If the emergency situation arises during non-work hours and forces the work place to close for the entire day...

AND the employee is...	THEN the absence is charged to...
scheduled to work on that day.
(This includes employees who arrive at work to discover the work place is closed.)	excused absence. Example:  Employee is scheduled to work on Friday.  Due to a storm on Thursday night, the work place is closed all day Friday.  The absence is excused.
on previously authorized paid leave (such as sick leave, annual leave, or credit hours, etc.)	excused absence. Example:  Employee is on sick leave when the work place closes for the entire day.  The employee's absence is charged to excused absence (not sick leave).
on AWS day off.	No absence is charged, since the employee was not scheduled to report to work.
on either LWOP or AWOL both the day before and the day after the day the work place closes.		LWOP or AWOL, depending on whether the employee is on LWOP or AWOL.

III.	If the emergency situation arises prior to or early in the work day and delayed arrival is authorized...

AND the employee is...	THEN the absence is charged to...

already at work.	Not charged, if the dismissal occurs before the employee is scheduled to begin work or excused absence is authorized for the period of time covered by the delayed arrival.
en route or still at home.	excused absence authorized by the administrative order or approved by leave approving official.
on approved leave.	leave the employee is already on.

 
Exhibit B -	ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS FOR ALTERNATE WORK SCHEDULE (AWS)  		EMPLOYEES

Employees on AWS are subject to the absence and leave provisions covered in the preceding Exhibit A of this Instruction.  They are also subject to the following provisions:

A.	Early Dismissal

1.	When an early work dismissal policy is authorized for a specific time, AWS employees are dismissed at the end of their tour of duty or at the specific time, whichever is earlier.

2.	When an early work dismissal policy is authorized for a specific number of hours, AWS employees are excused for the number of hours authorized by the announcement or Administrative Order before the end of the workday as ordered. 

B.	Delayed Arrival

1.	Tardiness of employees on compressed work schedules is excused based on the number of hours of administrative leave authorized by the applicable announcement, Administrative Order or OPDIV head.

2.	Tardiness of AWS employees who are required to revert to a fixed schedule during emergencies is treated consistent with that of employees in the same organization who are on a fixed work schedule.

3.	Employees on flexible work schedules who start work before the excused tardiness is authorized to work their regular tour-of-duty, do not receive extra compensation or credit hours for being on duty earlier than other employees whose tardiness is excused.

C:	Tour of Duty Defines Official Hours of Operation

1.	 Employees on flexible work schedules who start work before the Official hours of Operation (i.e. 8:00 am to 4:30 pm), are not required to remain at the duty site longer than their regular tour of duty (8, 9, 10 hours/day) simply to meet the end of the non-flexible work schedule traditional Official Hours of Operations.

2.	Employees on flexible work schedules, who are required to remain on duty after meeting their regular tour of duty hours are eligible for Credit Hours or other appropriate premium pay.



D.	Closure

1.	AWS employees whose tour-of-duty commences before the closure of the work place is announced and who reported to work and complete their tour of duty prior to the time of the closure announcement return home and do not receive compensation or credit hours for having come to work.

2.	Employees on a compressed work schedule who are in a scheduled non-work day status on  a day the work place is closed are not entitled to another day off, any compensation, or credit hours for the closure day. 
































630-1
Human Resources Manual HHS Instruction 630-1, Leave and Excused Absence
Date:  December 17, 2010

Material Transmitted:

Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 630-1, Leave and Excused Absence, December 17, 2010
Material Superseded:

HHS Instruction 630-1, Leave and Excused Absence, issued September 19, 2006.

Background: 

The Office of Personnel Management (OPM) issued final regulations to modify definitions related to family member and immediate relative in 5 CFR 630 and to add other defined terms related to the use of sick leave, funeral leave, voluntary leave transfer, voluntary leave bank, and emergency leave transfer in accordance with 5 CFR 630. The following revisions to this HHS Instruction were made: 

1.	Modified the definition of family member/immediate relative to make it more explicit and defined the terms committed relationship, domestic partner, parent, and son or daughter in accordance with 5 CFR 630.

2.	Corrected reference to family member in the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) coverage [630-1-30(H)(2)].  The FMLA statute and regulations do not include reference to family member or immediate relative. Rather, FLMA coverage specifically includes care for the employee’s spouse, son, daughter, or parent. 

Enactment of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2010 (Public Law 111-84, October 28, 2009) resulted in changes to the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) provisions for families of military service members.  The following revisions were made to this HHS Instruction:

1.	Provides a new entitlement to 12 administrative work weeks of unpaid exigency leave for federal employees (e.g., short-notice deployment, military events and related activities, urgent childcare and school activities, financial and legal arrangements, counseling, rest and recuperation, etc.)

2.	Expands the coverage for the 26-week entitlement for family members to care for a covered service member undergoing medical treatment, recuperation, or therapy for a serious injury or illness by amending the definitions of “serious injury or illness and “covered service member” to include veterans (if the veteran was a member of the Armed Forces at any time during the period of five years preceding the date on which the veteran undergoes the medical treatment, recuperation, or therapy).

3.	Addition of the Certification of Qualifying Exigency for Military Family Leave form.

Additional changes include:

1.	Exclusion of Commissioned Corps and update to 630-1-10 – Coverage – accordingly. 
2.	Removal of reference to interim policy in 630-1-120 - Creditable Service Based on Non-Federal Experience for Annual Leave Accrual.  Final regulations were effective October 18, 2006.

3.	Addition to 630-1-40 - Granting Annual Leave – to reflect the use of annual leave to establish initial eligibility for retirement or continuation of health benefits.

4.	Correction to 630-1-80 - Excused Absence- to reflect the number of days an employee may be excused to serve as an organ donor from 7 days to 30 days of paid leave. 

5.	Addition to 630-1-80 – Excused Absence - to update provisions for preventive health screenings. 

6.	Addition to 630-1-100 – Military Leave – to update the type of military leave available.

7.	Addition of 630-1-110 - Funeral Leave - in accordance with CFR 630, Subpart H – Funeral Leave and USC Title 5, 63.

8.	Update to 630-1-111 - Transfer and Re-credit of Leave between the Civil Service and Other Leave Systems – to remove reference to Commissioned Corps. The transfer of leave between the Commissioned Corps and the civil service personnel system is not authorized. 

In implementing this policy, OPDIVs/STAFFDIVs must meet their labor relations obligations covered under their Collective Bargaining Agreement, if applicable. This issuance is effective immediately. Implementation under this issuance must be carried out in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, bargaining agreements, and Departmental policy.




Denise Wells
Assistant Secretary for Human Resources

INSTRUCTION 630-1
 
 
Human Resources Manual
Instruction: 630-1:  Leave and Excused Absence
Issuance Date:  December 17, 2010


HHS PERSONNEL INSTRUCTION 630-1
LEAVE AND EXCUSED ABSENCE

630-1-00	Purpose
630-1-10	Coverage
630-1-20	References
630-1-30	General Provisions
630-1-40	Annual Leave
630-1-50	Sick Leave
630-1-60	Voluntary Transfer of Leave
630-1-70	Voluntary Leave Bank Program
630-1-80	Excused Absence
630-1-90	Court Leave
630-1-100	Military Leave
630-1-110	Funeral Leave
630-1-111	Transfer and Re-credit of Leave between the Civil Service and Other 				Leave Systems
630-1-120	Creditable Service for Annual Leave Accrual
630-1-130	Definitions

Attachment A	Justification for Crediting Prior Experience Towards an Employee’s Annual Leave Accrual Rate
Attachment B	Creditable Service for Annual Leave Accrual Service Agreement
Attachment C	Certification of Qualifying Exigency for Military Family Leave	

630-1-00	 PURPOSE

The purpose of this Instruction is to publish policy and establish Department-wide procedures and requirements for the use of leave and excused absence.  

630-1-10	COVERAGE

All Department employees are covered by this Instruction, except individuals appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the Senate, Commissioned Corps Officers, and other employees excluded by 5 U.S. Code 6301.

630-1-20 	REFERENCES

A.	U.S. Code 5551 (law - lump-sum payment for accumulated and accrued leave on separation)

B.	U.S. Code, Chapter 63 (law - leave)

C.	U.S. Code 501(g) (law - lump-sum leave payments made to Commissioned Corps employees)

D.	5 CFR, Part 630 (regulations - absence and leave)

E.	HHS Personnel Instruction 550-11 (compensatory time off for religious observances)

F.	HHS Personnel Instruction 610-3 (temporary closing of work places)

G.	HHS Personnel Instruction 792-2 (employee assistance program)

H.	HHS Guide for Timekeepers

I.	HHS Travel Manual Chapter 1-40 (attendance at nongovernment sponsored meetings)

J.	General Accounting Office Civilian Personnel Law Manual, Title II (index and summaries of CG decisions concerning leave issues)

K.	Comptroller General Decision B-133674

L.	Comptroller General Decision B-241272

M.	Comptroller General Decision B-246359

N.	52 CG 66471

O.	60 CG 381

P.	61 CG 558

Q.	U.S. Code 6303 (annual leave; accrual)

R.	5 CFR 630.205 (absence and leave:  creditable service)

S.	5 U.S.C. 6302 (general provisions)

T.	Chief Human Capital Officers Council Transmittal: Recent Changes to the Family and Medical Leave Act CPM 2010-06 (3/5/10)

U.	48 CG 212; Decisions of the Comptroller General B-116314, B-11727

630-1-30 	GENERAL PROVISIONS

A.	Requesting and Charging Leave

Operating Divisions (OPDIVs) may prescribe the procedures for requesting leave (e.g., use of Standard Form 71, Request for Leave or Approved Absence, automated  time and attendance systems,  memorandum or verbal requests).

1.	The standard minimum charge for absence in pay status (leave) and for absence in non-pay status (leave without pay or absence without leave) is ¼ hour, except where OPDIV heads, or their designees, have established a minimum leave charge of ½ hour or one (1) hour.  (An employee must not be required to perform work during those periods of tardiness or unauthorized absence from duty for which the employee is charged with leave or absence without leave.)

2.	Leave is not charged for holidays or officially established non-work days, except in certain situations pertaining to leave without pay and absence without leave [See 630-1-30(D).]

B.	Mandatory and Discretionary Leave Approval

1.	When an employee has followed the proper procedures for requesting leave and provides acceptable medical evidence to support his/her absence,  the leave approving official must grant the employee’s request for sick leave, annual leave, or leave without pay when:

a.	An employee, who is a disabled veteran, presents an official statement from a medical authority that medical treatment is required in connection with the disability.  The employee must give prior notice of the period during which absence for treatment will occur.

b.	The employee has suffered an incapacitating job-related injury or illness, has exhausted any available continuation of pay, and is awaiting adjudication of a claim for employee compensation by the Office of Workers’ Compensation Programs.

c.	Leave requests meet the criteria for the Family Medical Leave Act. [See 630-1-30(H)]

2.	The leave approving official may grant advance sick or annual leave at his/her discretion.

C.	Uncommon Tours of Duty

For employees who work uncommon tours of duty during a regularly scheduled administrative work week (which is in excess of 40 hours in a calendar week), leave is charged for the number of hours of absence during the regularly scheduled tour. For example:

1.	An employee whose regularly scheduled tour of duty is 10 hours a day is absent for 8 hours and works 2 hours.  The employee is charged 8 hours leave.

2.	An employee whose regularly scheduled tour of duty is 44 hours a week is absent for a full week.  The employee is charged 44 hours leave.

D.	Leave Without Pay

1.	Leave without pay (LWOP) is approved leave for which the employee is not paid.  Employees do not have a right to LWOP except for specified situations such as:

a.	Disabled veterans for medical treatment for a service- connected disability

b.	Members of the Reserves or National Guard for military training duties

c.	Employees who are eligible for and invoke the Family Medical Leave Act (unless the employee opts to use accrued leave.)

2.	In all other situations, management has the discretion to determine whether requests for LWOP will be approved.

3.	LWOP must not be granted when absence without leave (AWOL) is appropriate.

E.	Absence Without Leave

1.	AWOL is a non-pay status and shall be charged when an employee is absent without permission or has not notified his/her supervisor or provided satisfactory explanation or documentation for the absence from duty.  

2.	An AWOL charge may be changed to an appropriate type of leave if the leave-approving official determines that the employee has satisfactorily explained the absence or presented acceptable documentation.

F.	Charges to AWOL or LWOP for Holidays

Federal holidays that occur during a period of AWOL or LWOP are charged to AWOL or LWOP as follow:

1.	Employees in a non-pay status (AWOL or LWOP) immediately before and after a holiday are not entitled to pay for the holiday.  They must be charged AWOL or LWOP, as appropriate, for the holiday.  (Comptroller General Decision B-187520, February 22, 1977, and the HHS Guide for Timekeepers, Chapter 5, Unpaid Leave, March 2005.)

2.	Employees in a non-pay status (AWOL or LWOP) either before or after a holiday are not charged AWOL or LWOP for the holiday.  They are entitled to pay for the holiday.  It is presumed that the employee would have been available for work on the holiday unless the employee was in a non-pay status both before and after the-holiday.  (56 Comptroller General 393.)

3.	Employees scheduled to be on LWOP during a pay period when a holiday occurs must not be returned to pay status (i.e., duty or paid leave) either the day before or the day after the holiday for the sole purpose of taking advantage of being paid for the holiday.

G.	Repayment of Advance Leave by Employees Who Are Separating

Employees separating from the Federal service must repay any annual or sick leave advanced and not earned at the time of separation. Exception: repayment is not necessary under any of the following conditions:

1.	If the separation is because of entry into the military service with restoration rights.  (However, if the employee exercises the restoration rights, the leave indebtedness will be re-credited as an indebtedness.)

2.	If the separation is because of death or disability retirement.

3.	If the separation is based on a disability that prevents the employee from returning to duty or continuing in the service.

H.	Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA)

1.	Basic Leave Entitlement - Under the FMLA, employees are entitled to up to 12 weeks of leave without pay (LWOP). Exclusions: 

a.	Employees serving under intermittent appointments or temporary appointments with a time limitation of one year or less

b.	Employees with less than 12 months of Federal service

c.	Other individuals excluded under 5 CFR 630.1201(b).

2.	Employees may request FMLA:

a.	Because of the birth of a son or daughter of the employee and in order  to care for such son or daughter

b.	Because of the placement of a son or daughter with the employee for adoption or foster care

c.	In order to care for the spouse, or a son, daughter, or parent, of the employee, if such spouse, son, daughter, or parent has a serious health condition

d.	Because of a serious health condition that makes him/her unable to perform the functions of the employee’s position; and/or

e.	Because of any qualifying exigency arising out of the fact that the spouse, son, daughter, or parent of the employee is on covered active duty (or has been notified of an impending call or order to covered active duty) in the Armed Forces.

3.	Employees who do not comply with the notification and medical certification requirements of 5 CFR 630.1206 and 5 CFR 630.1207(b) are not entitled to FMLA leave.

4.	Holidays that occur during the period in which an employee is on family and medical leave are not counted toward the 12-week entitlement. [5 CFR 630.1203(e)]

5.	Military Leave Entitlement to Care for a Covered Service Member - The FMLA  provides military family leave entitlements for a Federal employee who (1) is the spouse, son, daughter, parent, or next of kin (i.e., nearest blood relative) of a covered service member with a serious injury or illness and (2) provides care for such service member.  

a.	Covered family members are entitled to up to 26 weeks of FMLA leave during a single 12-month period to care for the service member (hereafter referred to as “leave to care for a covered service member”.) 

b.	The serious illness or injury must have been incurred by the covered service member in the line of duty while on active duty in the Armed Forces. 

c.	During the single 12-month period, the employee is entitled to a combined total of 26 weeks of regular/basic FMLA leave to care for a covered service member.  For example, if during the single 12-month period an employee wants to take six weeks of regular FMLA leave for the birth of a child, as well as FMLA leave to care for a covered service member, the six weeks of regular FMLA leave is subtracted from the combined entitlement of 26 weeks, leaving the employee with 20 weeks of leave to care for a covered service member. 

d.	The use of this leave to care for a covered service member in a single 12-month period does not limit the use of regular FMLA leave during any other 12-month period.  For example, if an employee uses 26 weeks of FMLA leave to care for a covered service member during a single 12-month period but has not used any regular FMLA leave during that period, the employee would still be entitled to use up to 12 weeks of regular FMLA leave immediately following the single 12-month period.

e.	FMLA leave to care for a covered service member is unpaid leave for which an employee may substitute any accumulated annual or sick leave.  The normal leave year limitations on the use of sick leave to care for a family member do not apply; an employee may substitute annual or sick leave for any part of the 26-week period of unpaid FMLA leave to care for a covered service member.

I.	Certification of Qualifying Exigency

1.	Employees must provide 30 days advance notice, when possible, to his/her immediate supervisor to request FMLA leave for qualifying exigency. (See Attachment C - Certification of Qualifying Exigency for Military Family Leave.) 

2.	Employees must provide sufficient information to determine whether the request for exigency leave meets federal requirements and the anticipated timing and duration of the leave.

3.	Employees are required to provide a copy of the covered military member’s active duty orders or other documentation issued by the military only once unless the need for leave arises out of a different covered active duty or call to covered active duty status of the same or a different covered military member. 

630-1-40 	ANNUAL LEAVE

A.	Qualifying Period

1.	An employee whose appointment is for 90 calendar days or longer earns and may be granted annual leave beginning with the first day of the first full pay period following appointment. 

2.	If an appointment is for less than 90 days, the employee is not entitled to annual leave but may request leave without pay.

a.	If an appointment of less than 90 days is extended or converted to another appointment of less than 90 days without a break in service of one work day, the employee will still not earn annual leave until the actual employment counted from the initial appointment equals 90 days.  As soon as the employee has 90 days of employment, he/she earns annual leave retroactive to the initial appointment date.

b.	If after an initial appointment of less than 90 days, the extension or conversion to appointment was for 90 days or more, the employee earns annual leave retroactive to the date of the initial appointment. 

c.	If an employee took leave without pay while under an appointment of less than 90 days and then earns annual leave retroactive to the initial date of the appointment as described in number 1 above, he/she may not substitute annual leave for the leave without pay. 

d.	If an employee is currently on an appointment of less than 90 days and has annual leave re-credited from a lump-sum payment from previous Federal service, the employee may use the re-credited annual leave during the current appointment at his/her request.

B.	Maximum Accumulation

1.	Employees can carry over to the next leave year a maximum of 30 days (240 hours) of accrued annual leave. (720 hours for members of the Senior Executive Service and 360 hours for Federal employees stationed overseas).  

2.	Leave earned in excess of these maximums is forfeited if not used by the end of the leave year. (Under special conditions, forfeited annual leave may be restored as described in 630-1-40(F).

C.	Granting Annual Leave

1.	The employee initiates a request for use of annual leave and the request is acted upon by the leave-approving official.  Leave-approving officials may, consistent with operational demands, prescribe when annual leave may be taken, refuse to grant annual leave, or revoke annual leave that has been granted and recall an employee to duty based on the needs of the mission.

2.	For circumstances in which annual leave may be substituted for sick leave, see 630-1-50(A)(3).

3.	For circumstances in which sick leave may be substituted for annual leave, see 630-1-50(A)(2)(f).

4.	Annual leave may not be granted to an employee when it is known in advance that the employee is separating from Federal service, except where the date of separation has already been established under regulatory or statutory requirements (e.g. reduction in force or transfer of function); or in order for the employee to qualify for an immediate retirement; or for an employee to qualify to carry health benefits coverage into retirement.

D.	Advance Annual Leave

1.	Employees are not entitled to advance annual leave. However, under very unusual circumstances, an employee may be granted advance annual leave up to the amount to be earned by the end of the appointment or the end of the current leave year, whichever is sooner. 

2.	Annual leave must not be advanced when it is likely the employee will retire, be separated, or resign before the advanced leave will be earned.

E.	Leave Indebtedness

1.	An employee’s annual leave account may be overdrawn at the end of the leave year through error or because the employee was advanced annual leave and then did not earn the expected amount due to being on leave without pay or absent without leave.  When an employee’s account is overdrawn, the debt will be carried over and charged against annual leave earned in the following year, unless the employee elects to make a refund payment.

2.	An employee who is separated while indebted for advance annual leave must refund the amount due or have the amount owed deducted from any monies due to the employee.  For exceptions, see 630-1-30(F).

F.	Restoration of Annual Leave

1.	Conditions

a.	As a general rule, annual leave in excess of an employee’s maximum carryover balance is forfeited if not used by the end of the leave year.  This excess annual leave, sometimes called “use or lose” leave, may be considered for restoration only under one of the following conditions:

(i)	To correct an administrative error when the error causes the loss of annual leave.

(ii)	When annual leave is scheduled in writing in advance but its use is denied because of an exigency of the public business.

(iii)	When use of scheduled annual leave is prevented by illness or injury, provided the annual leave was scheduled in writing in advance and its use could not be rescheduled between the termination of the illness and the end of the leave year.

b.	OPM regulations require that “use or lose” annual leave must be scheduled at least three pay periods prior to the end of the leave year, except as noted above. The Department does not have authority to waive this requirement.

c.	The leave-approving official must approve the employee’s request “in writing in advance” for “use or lose” annual leave for use at the time requested by the employee or, if that is not possible, must reschedule the leave for use at some other mutually agreeable time before the end of the leave year.

d.	If an exigency arises which necessitates cancellation of the employee’s “use or lose” annual leave, the situation must be presented to the official with authority to make an exigency determination. That official must determine:

(i)	Whether or not an exigency exists which is of such importance that an employee cannot be released from duty; and

(ii)	Whether or not there is any reasonable alternative to the cancellation of an employee’s “use or lose “annual leave, or to the assignment of that employee to the work generated by the exigency.

e.	The determination must be documented and the specific beginning and ending dates of the exigency must be fixed. The determination of the exigency must be made before the cancellation of the employee’s scheduled leave and not after the fact.

f.	If the requirements in b and c (2) above are not met (i.e., the employee’s request was submitted but not approved, or the exigency determination was not made before the employee’s leave was canceled), this may be considered an administrative error and the forfeited annual leave may be considered for restoration. (See 57 Comptroller General 325 and 58 Comptroller General 684.) However, if the employee did not request the leave in writing in advance, this is not considered an administrative error and the forfeited annual leave cannot be restored.  (The only exception is for a prolonged illness preceding the end of a leave year where the employee may be presumed to have requested proper scheduling of the annual leave.) (See Comptroller General Decision B-193431, dated August 8, 1979.)

g.	If an exigency or illness that caused cancellation of an employee’s “use or lose” annual leave terminates before the end of the leave year, efforts must be made to reschedule the annual leave before the end of the leave year to avoid forfeiture.

2.	Time Limit for Use of Restored Annual Leave—Except for Extended Exigency

a.	The maximum time limit for use of restored leave is the end of the leave year in which the 2-year anniversary date of restoration occurs.  Leave which is not used by this deadline may not be restored again.

b.	The date of restoration is determined as follows:

(i)	The date the annual leave was restored in correcting an administrative error; or

(ii)	The date fixed by management as the end of the exigency that resulted in the forfeiture of the annual leave; or

(iii)	The date the supervisor, after considering the medical documentation, ascertains that the employee is able to return to duty, if the leave was forfeited because of sickness or injury. 

c.	Employees with a restored annual leave account may use their regular annual leave and their restored leave in any order they choose, but they must advise their leave-approving official and the timekeeper of their choice.  Once an employee makes an election, he/she may not change it after the leave has been used.

3.	Time Limit for Use of Restored Annual Leave—Extended Exigency

a.	An extended exigency is defined as significant circumstances that meet all of the following conditions:

(i)	Threaten the national security, safety, or welfare;

(ii)	Last more than 3 calendar years;

(iii)	Affect a segment of an agency or occupational class; and

(iv)	Preclude subsequent use of both restored and accrued annual leave within the time limit specified in 630-1-40(F)(1)(e).

4.	The maximum time limit for use of annual leave restored because of an extended exigency is two years for each calendar year, or part thereof, that the exigency existed regardless of the number of years during the exigency in which the employee forfeited leave. 

G.	Lump-Sum Payment for Annual Leave

An employee with accumulated annual leave, including unused restored leave in a separate account, is paid a lump-sum at his/her current hourly rate for all unused annual leave at the time of separation.  If there is a general pay increase during the period of time which would have been covered by the leave had the employee actually used it, the employee is paid at the higher rate of pay for leave which would have covered the period following the effective date of the pay increase. The lump-sum payment may be adjusted to collect the amount of any debts owed to the Government.

630-1-50  	SICK LEAVE

A.	Granting Sick Leave

1.	A leave-approving official may grant sick leave to an employee for non-emergency dental, optical, or medical examination or treatment (including for physical or mental conditions).  The employee must request sick leave in advance for non-emergency purposes.

2.	If the employee has followed proper leave-requesting procedures and provides acceptable evidence, a leave-approving official must grant an employee’s request for sick leave (but is not required to grant a request for advance sick leave):

a.	When the employee is incapacitated to perform duties due to illness (physical or mental), injury, or temporary disability, including pregnancy. An employee with a disability who depends on an aid, mechanical or otherwise, to perform work is normally incapacitated without the aid.  A seeing-eye dog, a wheelchair, or any prosthetic device may be considered an extension of the person. Granting sick leave for such purposes as training, replacement, or repair is appropriate under the same conditions as any other incapacitation. 

b.	For emergency medical, dental, or optical examination or treatment.

c.	When an employee is required to care for a member of his/her immediate family with a serious health condition or to make arrangements for or attend the funeral of a family member. Full-time employees may not exceed a total of 104 hours or up to 13 days in a leave year for these purposes. The limitations for part-time employees or employees with an uncommon tour of duty are proportional to those for full-time employees. (See 5 CFR 630.401)

d.	A maximum of 30 days of sick leave may be advanced to a full-time employee at the beginning of a leave year or at any time thereafter in the case of a serious disability or ailment of the employee or family member or for purposes relating to the adoption of a child.  For a part-time employee or an employee on an uncommon tour of duty, the maximum amount of advanced sick leave must be prorated according to the number of hours in the employee’s regularly scheduled administrative workweek. (See 5 CFR 630.401)

e.	When the organization has made a determination that the employee is incapacitated and meets the requirements for disability retirement and the OPM is processing the employee’s retirement application.

f.	For treatment of a disabled veteran or adjudication of a claim concerning a job-related injury or illness, as described in 630-1-30(B)(1).

g.	When an employee is sick within a period of annual leave, provided that the employee presents medical documentation to support the sick leave immediately upon return to duty.

h.	When an employee would, as determined by the health authorities having jurisdiction or by a health care provider, jeopardize the health of others by his or her presence on the job because of exposure to a communicable disease.

i.	When an employee must be absent from duty for purposes relating to his  or her adoption of a child, including appointments with adoption agencies, social workers, and attorneys; court proceedings; required travel; and any other activities necessary to allow the adoption to proceed

3.	Upon request, the leave approving official may grant annual leave, if available, or leave without pay for a period of illness which cannot be covered by sick leave or advanced to the employee. However, annual leave must not be substituted retroactively for regular sick leave.  Annual leave may be substituted retroactively to liquidate an employee’s indebtedness for advance sick leave.

4.	Leave-approving officials will usually charge sick leave only at an employee’s request. 

a.	Officials may, however, place an employee on sick leave without the employee’s request when the employee is absent under extenuating circumstances clearly indicating that he/she is unable to work and unable to request leave (e.g., the employee is in a coma). If the employee is still unable to work after exhausting his/her accrued sick leave and is unable to request appropriate leave, the leave-approving official may consider advancing sick leave or may consider charging the continued absence to annual leave or to leave without pay. In addition, the official may pursue use of the Voluntary Leave Transfer Program on behalf of the employee.

b.	In extraordinary circumstances, leave-approving officials may also place an employee on sick leave without the employee’s request if the employee reports for duty but is determined to be unable to work because of illness (mental or physical).  However, placing an employee on sick leave in this situation without his/her consent has been determined by the Merit Systems Protection Board to be a suspension, thus entitling the employee to notice and other due process protection.

B.	Advance Sick Leave

1.	An advance of sick leave may be made to an employee with a zero sick leave balance if the employee has a serious disability or ailment, provided the total advance at no time exceeds 30 days and there is a reasonable expectation that the employee will return to duty.  For an employee holding a limited appointment, sick leave must not be advanced in excess of the sick leave to be earned during the remaining period of employment.  Sick leave must not be advanced when it is likely the employee will retire, be separated, or resign before the advance leave will be earned.  Employees have no entitlement to advance sick leave.

2.	The employee’s request for advance sick leave must be in writing and must be supported by medical documentation acceptable to the leave-approving official in accordance with the respective collective bargaining agreement and instructions issued by the OPDIV.  Usually the disability or ailment will be of such seriousness as to require a period of absence of at least five consecutive work days, unless an absence for a shorter period is determined to be appropriate (for example, intermittent absences for chemotherapy, kidney dialysis, etc.)

3.	Advance sick leave may be granted regardless of whether the employee has annual leave to his/her credit.  Any sick leave earned after the sick leave is advanced will be used to liquidate the advance sick leave.

4.	An employee separated while indebted for advance sick leave must refund the amount due or have the amount owed deducted from any monies due to the employee.  For exceptions, see 630-1-30(F).

5.	As an alternative to advance sick leave, the employee and the supervisor may consider the Voluntary Leave Transfer Program, leave without pay, or an adjustment from full-time to part-time employment during a period of recuperation, thus allowing the employee to work less than eight hours daily until the employee is fully recovered.  In considering such options, the supervisor and the employee should consult the servicing personnel office regarding the effects of LWOP and part-time employment on the employee’s benefits, as well as possible employment ceiling implications in moving between full-time and part-time status.

C.	Evidence to Support Sick Leave

1.	Employees must submit evidence as required by their leave-approving official to support approvals of sick leave.  Officials have the discretion to require different forms of evidence depending upon the circumstances.  For example, a leave-approving official:

a.	May require medical documentation for extended absences, e.g., over three consecutive work days (or for shorter periods when an employee has been advised that medical documentation will be required).  Medical documentation is defined as that which is signed by the employee’s health care provider and is sufficiently specific for the leave-approving official to make a reasonable decision that the employee was incapacitated to perform the duties of his/her position.

b.	May require the employee’s signature on the SF 71, Request for Leave or Approved Absence, a written statement signed by the employee, or other evidence which is administratively acceptable to the leave-approving official when the period of absence is relatively short or the nature of the employee’s illness did not require an appointment with a health care provider.

2.	Employees must submit acceptable evidence or medical certification for a request for sick leave no later than 15 calendar days after the date the agency requests such medical certification.   If circumstances beyond the employee’s control prevent a timely submission despite the employee’s diligent good faith efforts, the employee must provide the evidence within a reasonable period of time, but no later than 30 calendar days after the date the agency requests such documentation. Failure to do so is grounds for disciplinary action for failure to follow proper leave procedures.  If the employee is placed on AWOL, the Merit Systems Protection Board has ruled that if the employee later submits adequate documentation, the AWOL cannot stand and any disciplinary action based solely on AWOL would be overturned.  However, an action based on failure to follow proper leave procedures could still be upheld.  An employee who does not provide the required evidence within the specified timeframe is not entitled to sick leave. 

3.	Leave-approving officials may require that employees submit medical documentation during a period of extended sickness. The purpose of such a requirement is to obtain information that is necessary for planning work or for determining that the approval of continued leave is appropriate (e.g., the health care provider’s prognosis of when the employee will be able to return to work; what limitations, if any, the physician will temporarily place on the employee’s activities; and, if applicable, what other work the employee could perform). 

630-1-60 	VOLUNTARY TRANSFER OF LEAVE

A.	Purpose

Under the Voluntary Leave Transfer Program (VLTP), unused accrued annual leave may be transferred for use by another employee who has been determined to have a medical or family medical emergency and has been approved as a leave recipient.

B.	Definitions

Medical emergency means a medical condition of an employee or a family member that is likely to require an employee’s absence from duty for a prolonged period of time (24 hours for full-time employees) and is likely to result in a substantial loss of income to the employee because of the unavailability of paid leave. (Absence from duty necessitated by pregnancy and childbirth is an acceptable reason for requesting use of the VLTP.)

C.	Applying to Become a Leave Recipient

1.	Current employees affected by a medical or family medical emergency must apply in writing to become a leave recipient.  In the event that an employee is not capable of making application on his or her own behalf, another employee in this Department, an employee’s representative, or a family member may make the application.

2.	Each application for VLTP is to be initially submitted to the immediate supervisor of  the potential leave recipient for consideration and must include:

a.	The name, position title, and grade or pay level of the prospective leave recipient

b.	A brief description of the nature, severity, and anticipated duration of the medical or family medical emergency affecting the applicant

c.	A statement from a physician or other appropriate expert (e.g., Christian Science Practitioner, chiropractor, psychologist, etc.) and any additional information, as appropriate,  that shows the nature, severity, and duration of the medical or family medical emergency.

D.	Retroactivity

Transferred annual leave may be substituted retroactively for a period of leave without pay (LWOP) or to liquidate advanced annual or sick leave granted to the approved leave recipient to cover absences during a medical or family medical emergency.
	
E.	Processing Applications

The actual approval or disapproval of an application must be based on the determination by designated officials as to whether the potential leave recipient’s absence from duty is (or is expected to be) at least 24 hours.  (In the case of a part-time employee or an employee with an uncommon tour of duty, the determination should be made on the basis of 30% of the average number of hours of work in the employee’s biweekly scheduled tour of duty.) Such absence can be consecutive or intermittent hours during the leave year. 
	
F.	Leave Donations from Other Federal Agencies

This Department will accept the transfer of annual leave from donors employed in other Federal agencies, and employees of this Department may donate annual leave to employees in other Federal agencies when other agencies accept outside donations.

G.	Using Transferred Leave

1.	A recipient’s annual and sick leave accrued and accumulated prior to the approval date of the recipient’s application must be used before any transferred annual leave.  Sick leave must first be used in situations involving care for a family member. 

2.	Transferred annual leave may accumulate without regard to the limitations imposed by 5 U.S.C. 6304(a). 

3.	Transferred leave may not be:

a.	Transferred to another leave recipient; or

b.	Included in a lump-sum payment; or

c.	Made available for re-credit upon reemployment by a Federal agency; or

d.	Used after the recipient’s medical or family medical emergency is terminated.

H.	Accrual of Annual and Sick Leave

Once the employee is using the transferred leave, he/she continues to accrue annual and sick leave up to a maximum of 40 hours in each category (or, in the case of a part-time employee or an employee with an uncommon tour of duty, the average number of hours of work in the employee’s weekly scheduled tour of duty) regardless of whether it is a family medical or personal medical emergency.  Once 40 hours of each type of leave are accumulated in this separate account and the medical emergency still exists, this separate leave accumulation stops.

1.	This annual and sick leave accrued by the employee while in transferred leave status must be kept in a separate leave account from any leave account under 5 U.S.C. 6304 and 5 U.S.C. 6307 and must not be available for the employee’s use until the first applicable pay period beginning after the date on which the employee’s medical emergency ends, except that it may be used if the employee exhausts all donated leave.

2.	Any leave recipient who returns to work on a part-time schedule while still in a medical emergency situation (e.g., therapy, gradual return to work under doctor’s orders, family member’s therapy) will earn regular annual and sick leave (5 U.S. Code 6304 and 6307).  If in a given pay period an employee uses some donated leave but also works and uses regular leave, all leave earned during that pay period is credited to the employee’s regular leave account, not the separate account described above. If otherwise permitted, this accrued regular leave must be used before any donated leave.

3.	If an employee who is in a leave transfer status terminates his/her Federal service, these separate 40-hour annual and sick leave accruals may not be credited to the employee for lump-sum leave purposes.

I.	Donating Leave

1.	Without a waiver, a leave donor may not donate more than one-half of the amount of annual leave he/she would be entitled to accrue during the leave year in which the donation is made.  This one-half limit applies whether the leave is donated all at one time or in increments at various times during the leave year. Waivers can be approved by leave-approving officials.

2.	Without a waiver, a leave donor who is projected to have annual leave that otherwise would be subject to forfeiture at the end of the leave year may not donate more than the lesser of:

a.	Half the amount of annual leave he/she would be entitled to accrue during the leave year in which the donation is made, or

b.	The number of work hours remaining in the leave year (as of the date of the transfer) for which he/she is scheduled to work and receive pay.

3.	As indicated in the law and regulations, an employee cannot donate leave to his/her immediate supervisor.

J.	Restoring Transferred Annual Leave

Unused leave donated to the recipient must be restored to the donor’s account upon termination of a medical or family medical emergency .

630-1-70	VOLUNTARY LEAVE BANK PROGRAM

OPDIVs may elect to establish and administer a Voluntary Leave Bank Program, consistent with the applicable law and Office of Personnel Management regulations.  A Voluntary Leave Bank Program enables employees to contribute accrued or accumulated annual leave to a “leave bank”.  The leave from this bank may be made available to a leave bank member who requires leave because of a medical emergency.

630-1-80	EXCUSED ABSENCE

A.	Definition

Excused absence is absence from duty administratively authorized without loss of pay and without charge to leave. The term “administrative leave” is sometimes used to refer to excused absence.  Both the Merit Systems Protection Board and the Comptroller General have determined that it is inappropriate to grant long periods of excused absence for no other reason than to settle a case or to permit an employee to accumulate enough time to become eligible to retire.

B.	Excused Absence Situations

Situations where excused absence may be authorized include, but are not limited to the following:

1.	Attendance at administrative hearings.

2.	Bone marrow and organ/tissue donation and transplantation. An employee may use: 
a.	Up to exceed 7 days of leave to serve as a bone-marrow donor
b.	Up to 30 days of leave to serve as an organ donor. 

3.	Blood donations.

4.	Holidays for part-time employees.  Part-time employees are not entitled to (a) holidays designated by law or executive order or (b) days observed as holidays when the actual holiday falls on one of their non-work days (see 26 Comptroller General 690, and 32 Comptroller General 378). They are not entitled to an in lieu of holiday.  For example, if Christmas falls on Saturday, the in lieu of holiday is Friday for most employees. A part-time employee is not entitled to the Friday as a holiday, even if he/she were scheduled to work on that day.  However, in such a situation, the employee may be granted excused absence where, for example, the office is closed. (See Comptroller General Decision B-210741, April 24, 1984.)

5.	Medical Examinations and Treatments

a.	Examples are examination in connection with an application for disability retirement initiated by the Department and examination or preventive treatment authorized under the federal employees’ health program.

b.	For an employee who suffers a disabling traumatic injury on the job, the employee’s absence on the day of injury will be excused.  Continuation of pay (C.O.P.) may be authorized for subsequent absences, examinations, or treatments related to a traumatic injury.  When an employee has exhausted (or is not eligible for) the 45 days of C.O.P. and has returned to work, then LWOP, annual leave, or sick leave may be granted for injury-related examinations or treatment; the employee may then apply to the Office of Workers’ Compensation Programs for compensation or leave buy back for the period in question.

6.	Registration for military service.

7.	Participation in civil defense activities.

8.	Voting and registration.

9.	Inclement weather or closure of work place.

10.	Job interviews and other out-placement activities when it is determined that this  is in the Department’s interest. (Downsizing is the most common but not the only example where excused absence would be appropriate.)

11.	Participation in health and fitness activities.  An official with delegated authority may approve excused absence for an employee to participate in health and fitness activities if the activity is officially sponsored and administered and for a specific, fixed duration. Examples are Federal fitness day events, Department sponsored health screenings, agency fitness center orientation, or a smoking cessation program.

12.	Participation in preventive health screenings. Examples of preventive health screenings include, but are not limited to, screening for prostate, cervical, colorectal, and breast cancers, sickle cell anemia, blood lead level, blood cholesterol level, immunity system disorders such as HIV, and blood sugar level testing for diabetes.

a.	Up to four (4) hours of excused absence each leave year may be approved for employees with less than 80 hours of sick leave. Employees may request annual leave, sick leave, or leave without pay when more than four hours of administrative leave is needed. 

b.	An employee may not be granted excused absence to accompany a family member receiving preventative health screenings. 

c.	The four hours of excused absence may be used all at once or a portion at a time over more than one day during the leave year. 

d.	Employees are encouraged to make maximum use of existing work schedule and leave flexibilities (e.g., alternative work schedules, granting leave under the Federal Government's sick and annual leave programs, and granting excused absence to employees to participate in Agency-sponsored preventive health activities). 

e.	The supervisor may request medical documentation for an excused absence for preventive health screenings.

C.	Official Time

1.	Official time is not excused absence, but there may be situations where an employee is authorized to use official time to perform activities other than his/her normal duties.  The distinction can be very important because, for example, an employee injured while on excused absence may not be entitled to benefits under the Federal Employees’ Compensation Act (FECA), while an employee injured while on official time may be covered.

2.	Official time is included on the employee’s Time and Attendance Report as normal hours of work and is not entered as administrative leave.

3.	Supervisors may authorize official time in situations such as the following:

a.	For an employee serving as a labor organization representative. See 5 U.S.C. 7131 and applicable negotiated agreements

b.	For an employee representing another employee in an appeal, discrimination complaint, or grievance

c.	For an employee preparing a response to a notice of proposed adverse action

d.	For an employee meeting with an equal employment opportunity counselor

e.	For employees meeting with employee assistance staff for counseling

f.	For an employee who has prevailed in a civil rights action against the Department, the employee’s absence in connection with the action should be changed to official time (see 59 CG 290).  A determination to treat such an absence as official time can be made only upon conclusion of the court action.  While the court action is in process, the employee should request annual leave or leave without pay in accordance with 630-1-90(D)(3) 

g.	For employees to participate in fitness activities in order to help them meet job-related medical standards or physical requirements.

630-1-90	COURT LEAVE

A.	Definition

Court leave is authorized absence of an employee from official duty for attendance at court and other judicial proceedings, either as a juror or a witness in certain circumstances, without charge to other leave or loss of pay.


B.	Granting of Court Leave

1.	Court leave is granted to permanent and temporary employees, both full-time and part-time, for serving in a nonofficial capacity for:

a.	Jury duty with a Federal, District of Columbia, State, or local court.

b.	Witness duty on behalf of a State or local government.

c.	Witness duty on behalf of a private party when the Federal or District of Columbia government, or a State or local government, is a party to the judicial proceeding.

2.	Intermittent employees may not be granted court leave.

3.	A night shift employee who is eligible for court leave and who is in court during the day is granted court leave for the night shift. The employee is entitled to the night shift differential.

4.	When an employee is required to serve on a jury or as a witness while on annual leave, the leave-approving official must substitute court leave if the employee is eligible.  An employee who is on leave without pay when required to serve is not granted court leave.

5.	Court leave is granted only for the days of an employee’s scheduled tour of duty on which the employee performs court service or for portions of such days.

C.	Jury Duty

1.	It is Department policy to request exemption of an employee from jury duty only in those rare cases where the employee’s absence would seriously handicap the work of the Department.  In such cases, the supervisor should prepare a written statement which clearly relates how the work of the Department would be adversely affected and request an exemption from the appropriate court authority. Employees may request exemptions for compelling personal reasons on their own initiative.

2.	When excused from jury duty for a day or a part of a day, an employee must return to work if dismissed early enough to return more than two hours before the tour of duty is over.  The official authorized to grant court leave may continue the employee on court leave for the rest of the day in such cases only if the official determines that return to work would constitute a hardship for the employee.

D.	Witness Duty

1.	Attendance at a judicial proceeding as a witness in an official capacity is considered official duty and no leave of any kind is charged.  Attendance at a judicial proceeding by an employee who is summoned by the court or authority or assigned by the Department to testify in a nonofficial capacity on behalf of the United States Government or that of the District of Columbia, is also considered official duty.  Travel expenses for court attendance may be authorized in situations where the employee is considered to be performing official duty.

2.	Court leave may be granted to an employee who is testifying in a nonofficial capacity on behalf of a State or local government.

3.	Court leave may be granted to an employee who is testifying in a nonofficial capacity on behalf of a private party when the United States or District of Columbia Government or a State or local government is a party to the proceeding. (However, court leave is not to be granted to an employee who appears as a witness on his/her own behalf if such a suit is filed by that employee or if the employee is the defendant in the suit.  For absences for this purpose, the employee may request annual leave or leave without pay.)

4.	An employee may request annual leave or leave without pay when the employee is testifying in a nonofficial capacity in a court suit between private individuals or companies (i.e., the United States or District of Columbia Government or a State or local government is not a party to the suit).

E.	Procedures

1.	An employee who is called for court service as either a witness or juror must present the court order, subpoena, or summons to the leave-approving official. Upon return to duty, the employee must submit to the leave-approving official written evidence, such as a marshal’s statement of court attendance.

2.	Fees received by an employee for jury or witness service for which court leave is granted or official duty is considered proper cannot be retained by the employee.  The employee should accept and submit such fees to the appropriate HHS finance office.

a.	Fees may be retained if they are for service outside the regular tour of duty or on a non-workday or holiday.  Fees may also be retained if they are for service as a nonofficial witness in a court suit between private individuals or companies, since the employee is not on court leave or official duty in such a situation.

b.	Not all monies received for jury or witness service are classified as fees.  Some government entities provide “expense money” which is considered reimbursement for expenses incurred while serving as a juror or witness. Expense money received may be retained by the employee and need not be refunded to the Federal Government.

630-1-100 	MILITARY LEAVE

A.	Coverage

1.	An employee is entitled to time off at full pay for certain types of active or inactive duty in the National Guard or as a Reserve of the Armed Forces.

2.	Any full-time Federal civilian employee whose appointment is not limited to one year is entitled to military leave. Military leave under 5 U.S.C. 6323(a) is prorated for part-time career employees. 




B.	Types of Military Leave

1.	5 U.S.C. 6323 (a) provides 15 days per fiscal year for active duty, active duty training, and inactive duty training. An employee can carry over a maximum of 15 days into the next fiscal year. Inactive Duty Training is authorized training performed by members of a Reserve component not on active duty and performed in connection with the prescribed activities of the Reserve component. It consists of regularly scheduled unit training periods, additional training periods, and equivalent training. 

2.	5 U.S.C. 6323 (b) provides 22 workdays per calendar year for emergency duty as ordered by the President, the Secretary of Defense, or a State Governor. This leave is provided for employees who perform military duties in support of civil authorities in the protection of life and property or who perform full-time military service as a result of a call or order to active duty in support of a contingency operation. 

3.	5 U.S.C. 6323(c) provides unlimited military leave to civilian employees or individuals employed by the government of the District of Columbia, who is a member of the National Guard of the District of Columbia. Such employees are entitled to leave without loss in pay or time for each day of a parade or encampment ordered or authorized under title 39, District of Columbia Code. 

4.	5 U.S.C. 6323(d) provides that Reserve and National Guard Technicians only are entitled to 44 workdays of military leave for duties overseas under certain conditions.

C.	Crediting Military Pay Against Civilian Pay

1.	For employees entitled to military leave under 5 U.S.C. 6323(a), the employees retain the military pay as well as the civilian pay, including any premium pay (except Sunday premium pay) he/she would have received if not on military leave. 

2.	For employees entitled to military leave under 5 U.S.C. 6323(b) and (c), their civilian pay is reduced by the amount of military pay for the days of military leave. However, an employee may choose not to take military leave and instead take annual leave, compensatory time off for travel, or sick leave, if appropriate, in order to retain both civilian and military pay.

3.	For employees entitled to unlimited military leave under 5 U.S.C. 6323(c), the employee’s civilian pay is offset by the amount of the military pay.  (See 5 U.S. Code 5519.)

D.	Accumulating Military Leave

1.	Employees who are entitled to regular military leave but who do not use the entire 15 calendar days (or prorated earnings for part-timers) may carry over the unused portion from one fiscal year to the next. A maximum of 15 days can be carried over.

2.	Employees who are entitled to special military leave may not carry over any unused portion of the 22 work days to the next calendar year.



E.	Charges for Military Leave

1.	Military leave should be credited to a full-time employee on the basis of an 8-hour workday. The minimum charge to leave is one hour. An employee may be charged military leave only for hours that he/she would otherwise have worked and received pay.

2.	Employees who request military leave for inactive duty training (which generally is 2, 4, or 6 hours in length) are only charged the amount of military leave necessary to cover the period of training and necessary travel. 

3.	Employees may use up to 30 days of military leave in any fiscal year.  The military leave may be used during one or more periods of military duty during the fiscal year.

4.	Employees may take the full 15 days of military leave at the beginning of the fiscal year, even if the maximum of 30 days of military leave had been taken during the prior fiscal year and even if the military service is continuous. (See CG Decision B-241272.)

5.	For employees entitled to military leave under 5 U.S.C. 6323 (b), the leave is charged in the same increments as annual and sick leave.

6.	For employees entitled to-unlimited military leave for parades and encampments, the military leave is charged in increments of one day.  (See 60 CG 381.)

F.	Documentation

Employees called to military duty must furnish, to their leave-approving official, a copy of their military orders or a statement from their commanding officer.

630-1-110	 FUNERAL LEAVE

Up to three work days (per occurrence) may be granted for funeral leave to an employee in connection with the funeral of or memorial service for his/her immediate relative who died as a result of wounds, disease, or injury incurred while serving as a member of the armed forces in a combat zone.

Excused absence for funeral leave may also be granted to a veteran to enable him/her to participate in a military funeral as an active pallbearer or as a member of a firing squad or guard of honor. The maximum excused absence allowed in this instance may not exceed four hours in any one day.  

630-1-111 	TRANSFER AND RECREDIT OF LEAVE BETWEEN THE CIVIL SERVICE 			AND OTHER LEAVE SYSTEMS

A.	Statutory Requirements

5 U.S.C. 6308 requires that annual and sick leave be transferred or re-credited on an adjusted basis (i.e., seven calendar days of leave are equivalent to five workdays of leave) when an employee moves without a break in service between positions under different leave systems. 

B.	Transfer of Leave from Other Leave Systems

When an employee from another Federal agency with a different leave system transfers to a civil service position in this Department, the employee’s leave should be transferred in accordance with 5 CFR, Part 630, Subpart E, and 48 CG 212.  For example, a nurse in the Veterans Administration earns eight hours of annual leave per pay period and may accumulate a maximum of 685 hours.  If a nurse with an accumulation of 685 hours transfers to a civil service position in this Department, the 685 hours will constitute the employee’s annual leave ceiling (rather than the normal 240 hours). When the nurse uses more leave than he/she accrues during a year, the leave balance at the end of the leave year becomes the employee’s new maximum carryover (until it reaches the normal 240-hour carryover).

630-1-120	CREDITABLE SERVICE BASED ON NON-FEDERAL EXPERIENCE FOR 			ANNUAL LEAVE ACCRUAL

A.	Policy 

It is the policy of HHS to allow the flexibility of offering potential job candidates a service credit towards their annual leave accrual rate.  This hiring flexibility is to be used as a recruitment incentive for employees who will be newly appointed or employees being reappointed after a break in service of 90 days or more.  The credited experience must have been obtained in a non-Federal or active duty military position having duties that directly relate to the duties of the position to be filled.  The OPDIV/STAFFDIV Head and human resources officials must concur that this experience is necessary to achieve an important Department mission or performance goal.

B.	Responsibility

1.	Office of Human Resources (OHR), Office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration (ASA), Office of the Secretary (OS) - OHR is responsible for developing and issuing this policy.  The deputy assistant secretary for human tesources has authority to interpret and issue human resources policy within HHS. 

2.	Operating Division (OPDIV)/Staff Division (STAFFDIV) Heads – The OPDIV or STAFFDIV heads or their designees must approve that the selectee’s experience is necessary to achieve an important Department mission or performance goal.

3.	Human Resources (HR) directors – The Human Resources (HR) directors have authority to implement OPM’s regulations under 5 CFR 630.205.  For the purpose of this document, an HR director includes the human resources center directors, the HR director for the National Institutes of Health and the HR director for the Indian Health Service.  Using 5 CFR 630.205, the HR directors must:

a.	In conjunction with the selecting official, determine that the selectee hired:

(i)	Has the skills and experience necessary and essential to the position.

(ii)	Acquired the skills and experience through the performance of duties in a non-Federal position or an active duty uniform position that directly relate to the duties of the position for which the individual has been selected.

b.	Determine the amount of service to be credited for leave purposes.  This amount may not exceed the actual period of service during which the individual performed duties directly related to the position to which he or she is being appointed.

c.	Approve all documentation prior to the effective date of the employee’s entrance on duty and grant service credit prior to the employee’s entry on duty.’

C.	Documentation

1.	The selectee must provide written documentation, acceptable to the agency, of his or her qualifying service.  All documentation must be approved by the HR center director prior to the effective date of the employee’s entry on duty.  Credit is to be granted effective on the date that the employee enters on duty in the relevant position.  

2.	The HR center director shall justify and document his or her reasons for granting credit.  (See Attachment A). Such documentation shall include:  

a.	A copy of the position description for the position being filled and the vacancy announcement for the position (if applicable);

b.	The selectee’s resume, which in the case of non-Federal personnel, must clearly document the length and nature of the service to be credited or be supplemented by supporting documentation to this effect;

c.	For each period of service for which credit is granted, an explanation of how the duties relate to the position to which the selectee will be appointed; and

d.	In the case of active duty uniformed service credited, a form DD214, Certificate of Release or Discharge from Active Duty, documenting the service. 

e.	For each grant of credit, a copy of the justification and documentation, position description, vacancy announcement, and resume (both non-federal and uniformed service) shall be submitted to their human resource director with sufficient time to allow approval prior to the effective date of the employee’s entry on duty.

D.	Suspension of Creditable Service

An employee must complete one full year of continuous service with the OPDIV/STAFFDIV in order to retain this service credit beyond his or her initial appointment.  If the employee leaves the position prior to his or her first full year of employment, the Department must recalculate his or her service computation date for leave purposes; however, the employee will retain all accrued or accumulated annual leave for purposes of transfer or lump-sum leave payment.

E.	Reporting

1.	The HR center directors shall submit an annual report to the deputy assistant secretary for human resources on the use of this policy.  The report should contain information on the total number of selectees who were granted service credit during the previous fiscal year; the amount of annual leave the selectee was granted; and the number of positions designated necessary to achieve an important Department mission and goal.  This report is due on or before October 30.

2.	In addition, the Department’s human resources director may rescind this authority if it is determined that this flexibility is used inappropriately.

630-1-130 	DEFINITIONS

The following terms are defined for purposes of use of sick leave, funeral leave, voluntary leave transfer, voluntary leave bank, and emergency leave transfer.

A.	Committed relationship means one in which the employee, and the domestic partner of the employee, are each other’s sole domestic partner (and are not married to or domestic partners with anyone else); and share responsibility for a significant measure of each other’s common welfare and financial obligations.  This includes, but is not limited to, any relationship between two individuals of the same or opposite sex that is granted legal recognition by a State or by the District of Columbia as a marriage or analogous relationship (including, but not limited to, a civil union).

B.	Covered active duty

1.	In the case of a member of a regular component of the Armed Forces, duty during the deployment of the member with the Armed Forces to a foreign country; and 
2.	In the case of a member of a reserve component of the Armed Forces, duty during the deployment of the member with the Armed Forces to a foreign country under a call or order to active duty under a provision of law referred to in section 101 (a)(13)(B) of title 10, United States Code. 

C.	Covered Service / Military Member

1.	A member of the Armed Forces, including a member of the National Guard or Reserves, who is undergoing medical treatment, recuperation, or therapy, is otherwise in an outpatient status, or is otherwise on the temporary disability retired list, for a serious injury or illness; or
2.	A veteran who is undergoing medical treatment, recuperation, or therapy, for a serious injury or illness and who was a member of the Armed Forces (including a member of the National Guard or Reserves) at any time during the period of 5 years preceding the date on which the veteran undergoes that medical treatment, recuperation, or therapy.
3.	Includes the employee’s spouse, son, daughter, or parent for the purpose of exigency leave.
4.	Includes the employee’s spouse, son, daughter, parent, or next of kin for the purpose of leave to care for a covered service member.

D.	Domestic partner means an adult in a committed relationship with another adult, including both same-sex and opposite-sex relationships.

E.	Exigency leave – A qualifying exigency is a non-medical activity that is directly related to the covered military member’s active duty or call to active duty status. Examples of appropriate use of qualifying exigency leave: short notice deployment, military events and related activities, urgent childcare and school activities, financial and legal arrangements, counseling, rest and recuperation, post-deployment activities, and additional activities which arise out of the military member’s covered active duty or call to covered active duty status. Refer to Title 29, Section 825.126 - Leave because of a qualifying exigency for more information. 

F.	Family member means an individual with any of the following relationships to the employee:

1.	Spouse, and parents thereof;

2.	Sons and daughters, and spouses thereof;

3.	Parents, and spouses thereof;

4.	Brothers and sisters, and spouses thereof;

5.	Grandparents and grandchildren, and spouses thereof;

6.	Domestic partner and parents, sons, daughters, brothers, sisters, grandparents and grandchildren thereof, including domestic partners of any individual in paragraphs (b) through (e) of this definition; and

7.	Any individual related by blood or affinity whose close association with the employee is the equivalent of a family relationship.

G.	Immediate relative – Same as definition for Family Member. 

H.	Next of kin, used with respect to an individual, means the nearest blood relative of that individual. Refer to CFR 825.122(d).

I.	Parent 

1.	A biological, adoptive, step, or foster parent of the employee, or a person who was a foster parent of the employee when the employee was a minor;

2.	A person who is the legal guardian of the employee or was the legal guardian of the employee when the employee was a minor or required a legal guardian;

3.	A person who stands in loco parentis to the employee or stood in loco parentis to the employee when the employee was a minor or required someone to stand in loco parentis; or

4.	A parent, as described in paragraphs (a) through (c) of this definition, of an employee’s spouse or domestic partner.

J.	Serious injury or illness 

1.	In the case of a member of the Armed Forces (including a member of the National Guard or Reserves) means an injury or illness that was incurred by the member in line of duty on active duty in the Armed Forces (or existed before the beginning of the member’s active duty and was aggravated by service in line of duty on active duty in the Armed Forces) and that may render the member medically unfit to perform the duties of the member’s office, grade, rank, or rating; and

2.	In the case of a veteran who was a member of the Armed Forces (including a member of the National Guard or Reserves) at any time during a period described in paragraph (8)(B), means an injury or illness that was incurred by the member in line of duty on active duty in the Armed Forces (or existed before the beginning of the member’s active duty and was aggravated by service in line of duty on active duty in the Armed Forces) and that manifested itself before or after the member became a veteran.

K.	Son or daughter 

1.	biological, adopted, step or foster son or daughter of the employee;

2.	A person who is a legal ward or was a legal ward of the employee when that individual was a minor or required a legal guardian;

3.	A person for whom the employee stands in loco parentis or stood in loco parentis when that individual was a minor or required someone to stand in loco parentis; or

4.	A son or daughter, as described in paragraphs (a) through (c) of this definition, of an employee’s spouse or domestic partner.

L.	Spouse - an individual who is a husband or wife pursuant to a marriage that is a legal union between one man and one woman, including common law marriage between one man and one woman in States where it is recognized.

M.	Veteran - a person who served in the active military, naval, or air service, and who was discharged or released there from under conditions other than dishonorable.
 

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
JUSTIFICATION FOR CREDITING PRIOR EXPERIENCE
TOWARDS AN EMPLOYEE’S ANNUAL LEAVE ACCRUAL RATE

The Office of Personnel Management issued interim regulations on April 28, 2005, to implement Section 202(a) of the Federal Workforce Flexibility Act of 2004.  Section 202(a) amends 5 U.S.C. 6303 to provide OPM with the authority to prescribe regulations under which a newly appointed or re-appointed employee who is covered by the Federal annual and sick leave program, may be given service credit for prior experience that otherwise would not be creditable for the purpose of determining the employee’s annual leave accrual rate.

OPM has added regulations at 5 CFR 630.205(a) to allow the head of an agency or designee the authority to grant a newly appointed or reappointed employee with service credit for annual leave accrual rate purposes based on prior non-Federal work experience or a period of active duty in a uniformed service.   

Employees Name:_____________________________	

Position, Pay plan, Series, Grade:__________________________________

Prior to granting such credit, the HR director must determine that this employee meets both of the following conditions through reviewing justifications from the requesting organization:

1.	The skills and experience that this employee possesses are essential to the new position and were acquired through performance in a non-Federal position having duties that directly related to the position to which he or she is being appointed.   Justification:






2.	The use of this authority is necessary to achieve an important agency mission or performance goal.  Justification:







Note:  The vacancy announcement, position description(s), and employee’s application package must be attached to this justification.  If the service credit is based on a period of active duty in a uniformed service, you must also attach the employees DD-214 documenting this service.

REVIEWS AND APPROVALS

OPDIV/Center Recommending Official’s Signature

	Title	Date
OPDIV/Center Approving Official’s Signature

	Title	Date
HR Director’s Signature
	Title	Date
HHS/OS/ASAM/OHR 9/14/05	
 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
CREDITABLE SERVICE FOR ANNUAL LEAVE ACCRUAL SERVICE AGREEMENT

Name (Type/Print First, Middle, Last) ___________________________________________________

In consideration of service credit I am receiving towards my leave accrual rate and service computation date for which I am entitled to under the policies of the Department of Health and Human Services, I hereby agree:

1.	To serve in (OPDIV)    ________________________________ for a minimum of 1 full year of continuous service.
2.	That I am a newly appointed employee or an employee who is being reappointed following a break in service of at least 90 calendar days after my last period of civilian Federal employment.
3.	That the amount of service credited to me shall be determined by the HR director or his/her designee as prescribed by the HHS policy for Credible Service for Annual Leave Accrual. The service credited under this agreement is __________years, ________months, _________days.
4.	That my annual leave accrual rate will be:    0 4 hours      0 6 hours    0  8 hours / bi-  weekly.
5.	That my service computation date for annual leave accrual purposes will be: ___/__/____.mm/dd/yyyyy
6.	That acceptance of this agreement does not alter the conditions or terms of my employment.
7.	That this credit of service is based solely on the position to which I am assigned and is not associated with my performance and/or conduct.  Accordingly, this agreement will not preclude nor limit the Department of Health and Human Services from effecting personnel actions as may be appropriate.
8.	That in the event I separate from Federal service or transfer to another agency or HHS OPDIV prior to completing one (1) full year of continuous service, my service computation date will be re-calculated subtracting the credit that I received under this agreement. 
9.	That HHS policy is incorporated into and made a part of this agreement and I have read this policy.


I ___________________________________________, agree to the terms of this agreement on  ___/__/____.
   Name (printed)										mm/dd/yyyyy

___________________________________________
Employee Signature
REVIEWS AND APPROVALS

OPDIV/Center Recommending Official’s Signature

	Title	Date
OPDIV/Center Approving Official’s Signature

	Title	Date
HR director’s Signature

	Title	Date
I certify that the information entered on this form is accurate and that the proposed service credit is in compliance with statutory and regulatory requirements.	HR Specialist’s Signature and Title	Date
	HHS/OS/ASAM/OHR
 

Certification of Qualifying Exigency for Military Family Leave
(Family and Medical Leave Act)


Instructions: This form is used to request qualifying exigency leave under the Family and Medical Leave Act in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 6382 and 6383. Employees submit completed form and supporting documentation to the immediate supervisor for approval 30 days in advance of the event, if possible. Request may be denied if supporting documentation is not provided.


			
Employee’s Full Name	Telephone Number	E-mail Address	Today’s Date

Covered military member on active duty or call to active duty status in support of a contingency operation:

	Relationship of covered military member to you?

0  Daughter   0 Son    0 Parent   
0  Spouse

Full Name		Period of covered military member’s active duty

DOCUMENTATION: A copy of the covered military member’s active duty orders and supporting documentation are required as part of this request. Please check one of the following:

0A copy of the covered military member’s active duty or call to covered active duty orders is attached.
0Other documentation from the military certifying that the covered military member is on active duty (or has been notified of an impending call to active duty) in support of a contingency operations is attached. 
0I have previously provided my employer with sufficient written documentation confirming the covered military member’s active duty or call to active duty status in support of a contingency operation. 

QUALIFYING REASON FOR LEAVE: Briefly and specifically describe the reason you are requesting FMLA leave due to a qualifying exigency. Include sufficient information for the approving official to make a determination as to whether to grant exigency leave. Attach supporting documentation such as a copy of a meeting announcement for informational briefings sponsored by the military, documentation confirming an appointment with a counselor, childcare or school official, or legal or financial representatives, or post-deployment activities sponsored by the military, etc. Contact the human resources representative for questions regarding qualifying exigencies. 






AMOUNT OF LEAVE REQUESTED:

Approximate date qualifying exigency will being (or has begun)?  		Probable duration of exigency	

 

0Check here if you will you need to be absent from work for a single, continuous period of time due to the qualifying exigency. Include the beginning and ending dates for the period of absence (estimates are acceptable).




0Check here if you will need to be absent from work periodically/intermittently to address this qualifying exigency.  Provide a tentative leave schedule including the dates of any scheduled meetings or appointments. Estimate the frequency and duration of each appointment, meeting, or leave event, including any travel time (e.g., one deployment-related meeting every month, lasting four hours each).





Frequency:	     times per	0week(s)	0month(s)
Duration:	     hours or      day(s) per event

MEETING WITH THIRD PARTY:

Provide the contact information and a brief description of the nature of the meeting if leave is requested to meet with a third party (e.g., to arrange for urgent childcare, attend counseling, to make legal or financial arrangements, to act as the covered military member’s representative, etc.) 


		
Name of Individual	Title	Agency/Organization

		
Telephone Number	Email Address	

Nature of the meeting


		
Name of Individual	Title	Agency/Organization

		
Telephone Number	Email Address	

Nature of the meeting

 


		
Name of Individual	Title	Agency/Organization

		
Telephone Number	Email Address	

Nature of the meeting

CERTIFICATION – I certify that the information I provided above is true and correct.


		
Print Name	Signature of Employee	Date Signed




























990-1
Instruction 990-1, Workplace Flexibilities
Effective Date: 02/09/2022
Revised: 03/22/2022

Material Transmitted:
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 990-1, Workplace Flexibilities, dated February 9, 2022.

Material Superseded:
For non-Bargaining Unit Employees:  HHS Instruction 990-1.2, Telework, September 18, 2011

Background:
This Instruction establishes HHS' policy on the various workplace flexibilities available to employees in the performance of their duties consistent with applicable law, regulation, and guidance from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM).  In March 2022, the Workplace Flexibilities Agreement was finalized.

This policy is effective immediately and must be carried out by HHS Operating and Staff Division HR Centers in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, collective bargaining agreements, and Departmental policy.

/s/ W. Robert Leavitt
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources Chief Human Capital Officer

990-1-00  Sections
990-1-10       Purpose
990-1-20       Coverage and Exclusions
990-1-30       Delegation of Authority
990-1-40       References
990-1-50       Definitions
990-1-60       Responsibilities
990-1-70       Workplace Flexibilities
990-1-8

0       Determining Workplace Flexibilities Eligibility
990-1-90       Determining The Official Worksite
990-1-100     Work Related Injuries At The Alternative Worksite
990-1-110     Dependent Care
990-1-120     Leave, Early Dismissals, and Closures
990-1-130    Continuity of Operations Plan (COOP)
990-1-140    Workplace Flexibilities Approval, Denial, Suspension & Termination
990-1-150    Training Requirement
990-1-160    Documentation, Reporting, and Accountability

990-1-10  Purpose
This Instruction provides requirements and establishes standard guidelines and criteria to allow the use of broad workplace flexibilities across HHS.

When provisions of this Instruction differ from changes in applicable law or regulation, the changes in law or regulation apply.

990-1-20  Coverage and Exclusions
Coverage.
The provisions of this Instruction apply to all HHS employees - PDF, including employees under the Intergovernmental Personnel Act (IPA), and Federal employees on detail to the Department.
U.S. Public Health Service (USPHS) Commissioned Corps Officers who supervise Federal employees are required to execute the supervisory authorities outlined in this Instruction.
Exclusions.  This Instruction does not cover:
U.S. Public Health Service (USPHS) Commissioned Corps Officers
Directed reassignments or administratively determined changes in duty station
The provisions in this Instruction pertaining to conditions of employment for bargaining unit employees are fully negotiable in accordance with 5 U.S.C. Chapter 71, and any such actions may require notification to labor organizations when impacted employees are bargaining unit employees. When the provisions of this Instruction differ from the requirements of any applicable Collective Bargaining Agreements (CBA), the CBA takes precedence for bargaining unit employees.
990-1-30  Delegation of Authority
The authority to develop and implement the Department-wide Instruction for Workplace Flexibilities is delegated to the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources (DAS-HR).

The authority to approve, develop, and implement an Operating Division/Staff Division (OpDiv/StaffDiv) level workplace flexibility program in alignment with this Instruction is hereby delegated to the OpDiv/StaffDiv Heads.  The OpDiv/StaffDiv Head may delegate the authority to develop and implement Workplace Flexibilities Programs Managers to HR Directors or Executive Officers, as appropriate.

990-1-40  References
Public Law (P.L.) 106-346, Section 359, October 23, 2000 - PDF
P.L. 111-292, H.R. 1722, Telework Enhancement Act of 2010 - PDF
5 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) § 351.203, Definitions
5 CFR § 531.605 - PDF, Determining an employee's official worksite
5 CFR § 550.112(j) - PDF, Official Duty Station
5 CFR § 551.422(d) - PDF, Time Spent Traveling
OPM Guide to Telework and Remote Work in the Federal Government: Leveraging Telework and Remote Work in the Federal Government to Better Meet Our Human Capital Needs and Improve Mission Delivery, dated November 2021
Department of Labor Publication, CA-810, Injury Compensation for Federal Employees, Revised 2009 - PDF
HHS Office of Human Resources Instruction 610-1, Establishing and Administering Hours of Duty.
HHS Rules of Behavior for the Use of HHS Information and IT Resources Policy, HHS-OCIO-OIS-2019-05-004
HHS ASA Memorandum, Delegation of Human Resources Authorities, dated October 15, 2019
HHS Travel Policy Manual (Fiscal Year 2018 – Q4) - PDF
Department of State's Memorandum, Requirements for Executive Branch Employees Teleworking in Foreign Locations, June 6, 2016 (DETO)
990-1-50  Definitions
Agency Worksite.  The official Federal agency location where work activities are based, generally considered a centralized location of an employee's assigned organization.  The term regular worksite is also used to describe agency worksite.
Alternative Worksite.  Generally considered an employee's approved telework site, or, for a remote worker the approved remote worksite (e.g., an employee's residence).
Domestic Employees Teleworking Overseas Agreement (DETO).  Approved special arrangements allowing an HHS employee working in a position within the United States to telework from a foreign location for an established period.  OpDivs/StaffDivs who establish such a telework arrangement with an employee must adhere to the requirements in the Department of State's Memorandum, Requirements for Executive Branch Employees Teleworking in Foreign Locations, June 6, 2016, and the international requirements in HHS' Travel Policy Manual.
Directed/Emergency Telework.  Scenarios where employees may be directed to work from a location other than the alternative worksite pursuant to an agency's Continuity of Operations Plan (COOP), or pursuant to OPM regulations at 5 CFR 550.401-408, or 5 CFR 550.409.  These orders are not under an agency telework program, and thus are not dependent upon an employee having entered a telework agreement.
Eligible Positions.  Positions comprised of job duties that can be effectively performed outside the agency worksite without diminishing individual or organizational performance.
Commuting Area.  The geographic area that usually constitutes one area for employment purposes. It includes any population center (or two or more neighboring ones) and the surrounding localities in which people live and can reasonably be expected to travel back and forth daily to the agency worksite.
Official Worksite.  The official worksite is generally the agency worksite for most employees, including a teleworker. For a remote worker, the official worksite is generally the alternative worksite to which the employee is assigned.  The official worksite is the location of an employee's duty station as documented at item 39 on an employee's Standard Form (SF) 50.
Situational/Ad Hoc Telework.  A workplace flexibility allowing an employee with an approved written Workplace Flexibilities Agreement (WFA) to request to telework as the need arises.  Unlike routine telework, situational/ad-hoc telework occurs sporadically on an irregular basis without a regular telework schedule.
Remote Work.  A workplace flexibility allowing an employee to work at an approved alternative worksite, within or outside the local commuting area of the agency worksite, with no expectation to report to the agency worksite on a regular and recurring basis.
Remote – Within the Local Commuting Area. A position designation used when there is some frequency for an onsite presence (e.g., expectation for in-person collaboration or other in-person work activities on an irregular basis, or duties require an irregular, but consistent, e.g., twice per month, presence at the agency worksite).  For these positions, employees should have an official worksite/alternative worksite  within the local commuting area. The term "official worksite/alternative worksite" will be used throughout this Instruction in referencing a remote worker’s worksite, since their official worksite is an alternative worksite as well. 
Remote – Outside the Local Commuting Area. A position designation used when there is little to no onsite presence (e.g., expectation is for in-person requirement once or twice annually).  For these positions, employees are not required to have an official worksite/alternative worksite within the local commuting area.
Routine Telework.  A workplace flexibility, in which an employee, under a written agreement, is scheduled to perform their work at an approved alternative worksite on a regular and recurring basis.
Telework.  Is codified at 5 U.S.C. 6501 and refers to a work flexibility arrangement under which an employee performs the duties and responsibilities of such employee's position, and other authorized activities, from an approved worksite other than the location from which the employee would otherwise work.
Telework Ready.  The capability for an employee to work from an alternative worksite as may be required to continue operations through the efficient and effective use of information technology and telecommunication. 
Workplace Flexibilities Agreement (WFA).  A written agreement between the employee and the agency that allows employees and supervisors to establish telework or remote work in accordance with this Instruction.
Workplace Flexibilities Officer (WFO).  HHS-level official charged with overseeing the Workplace Flexibilities Program across the Department.
Workplace Flexibilities Program Manager (WFPM).  OpDiv/StaffDiv program manager charged with overseeing the Workplace Flexibilities Program within their OpDiv/StaffDiv.
Workplace Flexibilities Program (WFP).  A program that promotes use of telework, and/or remote work to promote a work/life balance for employees.
990-1-60  Responsibilities
HHS Assistant Secretary for Administration, Office of Human Resources (ASA/OHR):
Develops Department-wide human resources Instruction and guidance consistent with HHS and the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) policies, procedures, and all applicable Federal laws and regulations.
Designates a WFO to implement and oversee the Department's WFP and to incorporate workplace flexibilities into everyday business operations.
Periodically reviews and reports Operating Division and Staff Division (OpDiv/StaffDiv) workplace flexibility data to ensure conformance with HHS and OPM policies and guidance, and all applicable Federal laws and regulations.
Workplace Flexibilities Officer (WFO):  The WFO is responsible for overarching management and administration of the Department's WFP including, but not limited to:
Develops workplace flexibilities guidance and implement WFP Department-wide.
Manages compliance and accountability for WFP training requirements for all employees.
Leads the development of goals and metrics to evaluate Program effectiveness and data collection related to reporting requirements.
Periodically reviews OpDiv/StaffDiv program implementation procedures, actions, qualification standards, and reports to ensure conformance with HHS and OPM policies and guidance and all applicable Federal laws and regulations.
Serves as the primary HHS point of contact with OPM on workplace flexibilities.
Serves as a resource for managers and employees with regards to workplace flexibilities.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Heads:
Ensures Division compliance with this Instruction and applicable Federal laws and regulations related to workplace flexibilities.
Ensures the fair and equitable implementation and use of workplace flexibilities across the respective Division.
Ensures Division collaboration with WFO to address OpDiv/StaffDiv-specific needs.
Designates a WFPM for the Division or delegate authority to designate the WFPM as appropriate.
Human Resource Centers (HR Centers) Directors:
Complies with this Instruction and applicable Federal laws and regulations related to workplace flexibilities.
Ensures the employee's locality pay and benefits align with the employee's official worksite in accordance with 5 CFR 531.605.
Ensures changes to the official worksite (personnel action requests) are processed in a timely manner, generally within one pay period of receipt of the request.
Ensures compliance with and implementation of Workers' Compensation benefits and processes.
Ensures appropriate collective bargaining obligations are applied and satisfied.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Workplace Flexibilities Program Managers (WFPM):
Complies with this Instruction and applicable Federal laws and regulations related to workplace flexibilities.
Develops OpDiv/StaffDiv workplace flexibilities guidance in accordance with this Instruction and ensure proper implementation at OpDiv/StaffDiv.
Manages compliance and accountability for WFP training requirements for OpDiv/StaffDiv employees.
Establishes procedures, in coordination with HR Center, to ensure OpDiv/StaffDiv employee's locality pay and benefits align with the employee's official worksite, and is appropriately represented on their WFA.  
Coordinates, as necessary, with the HR Center, hiring manager and the WFO to ensure proper implementation and oversight of the OpDiv/StaffDiv WFP.
Provides information and data to the WFO when requested. 
Serves as the OpDiv/StaffDiv primary subject matter expert for the WFP and point of contact for addressing employee and supervisor inquiries.
Ensures employee WFAs remain current and accurate.
Supervisors:
Complies with, apply and enforce this Instruction and applicable Federal laws and regulations related to workplace flexibilities.
Ensures the fair and equitable implementation and use of workplace flexibilities across subordinate staff.
Ensures employee position description and assigned duties accurately reflect the employee's duties and responsibilities, and position eligibility is in alignment with the PD and assigned duties.
Reviews employees' requests for a WFA and approve, disapprove, or modify the request in accordance with this Instruction, any applicable OpDiv/StaffDiv guidance, and collective bargaining agreement requirements.  Ensure employees renew their agreement annually.
Complies with OpDiv/StaffDiv procedure for timely notification to the HR Center for any change to an employee's official worksite, generally within one pay period of the change.
Annually, completes the assigned mandatory workplace flexibilities training as required.
Ensures employees complete annual mandatory workplace flexibilities training.
Ensures compliance with current travel policies and guidance as they pertain to the approved workplace flexibility, this Instruction, and the employee's official worksite.
Ensures employee's transit subsidy application aligns with the employee's WFA.
Ensures employees in telework and remote work status receive the same benefits and opportunities (e.g., work assignments, awards and recognition, development opportunities, etc.) as employees who do not participate in a WFP.
Employees:
Complies with this Instruction, OpDiv/StaffDiv guidance, procedures, etc., and applicable Federal laws and regulations related to workplace flexibilities.
Ensures WFA accurately reflects alternative worksite information, timely request an update to the WFA if circumstances change and renew the WFA annually.
Obtains supervisor's approval prior to making any changes to their alternative worksite and/or schedule. 
Completes mandatory workplace flexibilities training prior to entering into any WFA.  Training is required annually, or for each new WFA.
Maintains a current WFA detailing any emergency responsibilities specified for a continuity of operations and/or other emergency event, as appropriate for the approved flexibilities.
Notifies the supervisor of a decision to end participation in the WFP.
Notifies supervisor within one (1) hour whenever problems arise that may adversely affect ability to perform work at the alternative worksite (e.g., power outages, technology issues, sick family members who require substantial attention, or other personal matters impacting their ability to perform their duties).
Complies with the appropriate protocol for reporting computer security incidents or when the employee suspects there may have been an incident.
Adheres to the Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive Branch (5 CFR Part 2635) and to supplemental standards, as issued.
During the hours the employee is on duty, regardless of worksite, the employee must be accessible by telephone, e-mail, instant messaging system, or other appropriate communication technology or software, as determined by management.
Ensures all Government-owned equipment is used in compliance with Departmental and OpDiv/StaffDiv policy.  Additionally, the employee shall ensure they use the Department's VPN account to access all Government systems while working at a site other than the agency worksite.
Those employees who telework on a situational/ad-hoc basis should participate in telework at least once per quarter to ensure readiness and to maintain the necessary discipline, approach, and skills.
Be familiar with the agency's emergency plans (continuity plan, pandemic plan, etc.) and the manager's expectations for how the employee will telework during such events.
990-1-70  Workplace Flexibilities
Workplace Flexibilities offered by the Department allow for the accomplishment of an employee's duties at an alternative duty station. Flexibilities offered for each position are dependent upon the nature of work, and in accordance with the ability to complete the activity at an alternative worksite.  Participation in the WFP is voluntary. An approved WFA is required for participation in any WFP.

Telework is a workplace flexibility that allows an employee the flexibility to perform the duties and responsibilities of the employee's position, and other authorized activities, from an approved alternative worksite.  Position eligibility for telework is determined by the nature of work and how many hours of work must be accomplished at the agency worksite during the typical bi-weekly pay period.
The official worksite for an employee with a WFA to telework is the agency worksite.
Options for telework as a flexibility include:
Routine telework:
Routine telework allows an employee to work from an approved alternative worksite following a regular and recurring schedule in accordance with an approved WFA.
Employees with a WFA for routine telework must be scheduled and physically report to the agency worksite at least two days each bi-weekly pay period.
Employees with a WFA for routine telework may also be eligible for situational/ad-hoc telework on an as needed basis and only with advance supervisory approval.
Situational/Ad-hoc telework:
Situational telework is sometimes referred to as unscheduled or ad-hoc telework.
Employees who do not have a routine telework WFA but may have a need to telework on an irregular basis either for mission needs or personal convenience should be eligible to participate in situational/ad-hoc telework WFA. Supervisors are encouraged to allow for situational/ad-hoc telework and seek to make reasonable adjustments to allow for situational/ad-hoc telework.
Employees with a situational/ad-hoc telework WFA must receive advance approval prior to using situational/ad-hoc telework. An employee who fails to obtain advance approval, maybe disciplined, up to and including removal.
Employees with only a WFA for situational/ad-hoc telework should telework at least once every three months to maintain telework readiness.
An employee with a WFA for routine or situational/ad-hoc telework is generally required to work during inclement weather days, emergency events, or other days as required by the agency, unless the employee requests leave.
Remote work allows an employee the flexibility to work from a single approved alternative worksite within or outside the local commuting area of the agency worksite with no expectation to report to the agency worksite on a regular bi-weekly pay period basis.
A position may be eligible for remote work (within or outside of the local commuting area) if the nature of work requires onsite work to be performed less than two days during a typical bi-weekly pay period.
Positions should be designated as “remote within the local commuting area of the agency worksite”, if there is some frequency with which the position requires an onsite presence (e.g., employee may be required at the agency worksite less than 2 days per bi-weekly pay period, or employee may be required at in-person work activities including, for collaboration, on an irregular basis, or duties require an irregular, but consistent, e.g., twice per month, presence at the agency worksite).  For these positions, employees should have an official worksite/alternative worksite within the local commuting area.
Positions should be designated as “remote outside the local commuting area of the agency worksite”, if the position requires little to no onsite presence (e.g., once annually).  For these positions, employees are not required to have an official worksite/alternative worksite within the local commuting area. Refer to the HHS Travel Policy for specific guidance.
The official worksite for an employee with an approved WFA for remote work, whether it is in the local commuting area or outside of the local commuting area, is the approved alternative worksite (e.g., the employee's home).
Changes to the Official Worksite/Alternative Worksite.
Employees must request to change the location of their official worksite/alternative worksite for remote employees in advance. Supervisors are encouraged to be flexible with a remote employee's official worksite/alternative worksite, provided it continues to meet the agency's needs and does not negatively impact the mission including, increase expenses for the agency. Employees may not begin working at a new official worksite/alternative worksite until it has been approved.
Upon approval of a new official worksite/alternative worksite for a remote employee, the employee must submit a new WFA with the new location.
Employees, whose WFA is modified at the request of the employee, are responsible for all expenses that may be incurred associated with the relocation.
The supervisor, in consultation with HR, will determine the appropriate locality-pay based on the new approved official worksite/alternative worksite location and initiate any necessary changes in accordance with OpDiv/StaffDiv procedures, generally, within one pay period of the change. The new locality pay will only take effect once the employee's eOPF is updated.
A remote employee's failure to timely report and obtain approval for a change to the employee's official worksite/alternative worksite may result in the suspension or termination of the employee's WFA, recoupment for overpayment of locality pay, and/or disciplinary/adverse action.
Remote employees, as directed by the supervisor or if stated in the WFA, may be required to report to the agency worksite.
Reimbursement for Travel to the Agency Worksite.
Remote employees who have an approved official worksite/alternative worksite within 50 miles of the agency worksite may not be eligible for travel reimbursement when commuting to and from the agency worksite. Refer to the HHS Travel Policy for specific guidance.
If the employee is required to be in a travel status for 12 hours or longer, the employee may be entitled to Per Diem. Refer to the HHS Travel Policy for specific guidance.
Compensatory Time Off for Travel.  Remote employees required to travel away from their official worksite/alternative worksite may be afforded compensatory time off for official travel, if the approved itinerary requires the employee to be in a travel status, when such time is not otherwise compensable. Refer to the HHS Travel Policy for specific guidance.
990-1-80  Determining Workplace Flexibilities Eligibility
The purpose of the HHS WFP is to expand options for when and where an employee may perform work.  The Department's recruitment efforts are aided by offering various options for where and when employees may work. Workplace flexibilities help to retain existing talent and increase productivity through employee engagement. These flexibilities benefit the employee as well. Workplace flexibilities benefit the employee through the enhancement of work/life balance allowing employee satisfaction and well-being.  Though not all flexibilities are available to all employees, the Department encourages management to allow some degree of workplace flexibilities to as many employees as possible.

The ability to participate in the WFP is intended to facilitate, not impede, the successful accomplishment of work. As such, not all positions will be eligible to telework or be remote. Participation in the WFP is determined by assessing several key elements involving the position, organizational/business needs of the OpDiv/StaffDiv, and the employee's eligibility:

The Position:
The nature of work associated with the position can be performed by allowing some or all duties to be completed without visiting the official worksite. This may include work assignments that involve field work or physical presence in some other location (e.g., court, other federal work site) that is not the official worksite.
Must assess position eligibility against the business needs of the organization, ensuring that the level of participation does not diminish organizational performance including, but not limited to, the impact to whether telework or remote status would negatively impact the effective accomplishment of work for others.
The resources required for the employee to complete the work are available/accessible virtually including, but not limited to, a computer to connect to the virtual private network (VPN), the Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP)
The ability to evaluate the quantity, quality, manner of performance, and timeliness, as appropriate, for the work.
The number of hours required to perform work at the agency worksite determines whether the position is eligible for telework (routine or situational) or remote work (within or outside of the commuting area of the agency worksite), or onsite work.
Remote Work Eligible: When duties require less than 16 hours per bi-weekly pay period at the agency worksite.
Routine Telework Eligible:  When duties require 16 - 64 hours per bi-weekly pay period at the agency worksite.
Situational/Ad-hoc Telework Eligible:  No minimum number of hours per bi-weekly pay period, determined on a project, work assignment, mission need, or in response to an employee request.
Note a position that is designated remote, is eligible for routine or situational telework based on employee preference. Similarly, a position designated routine telework is eligible for situational telework based on employee preference.

The Employee:

Employee eligibility is determined based on the factors as outlined below. Individual eligibility may be revoked if the employee’s performance diminishes or if the employee’s behavior warrants official disciplinary action. A WFA for telework or remote work may be terminated by the employee at any time and the agency may terminate a WFA if it is deemed to be in the best interest of the agency to do so.
For incumbent employees to be eligible to participate, the employee must have a performance plan in place and be performing at least at the fully successful level and participation is not expected to diminish organizational performance.
Employees hired in positions that were advertised as remote have no additional eligibility requirements.
An employee is considered ineligible if:
The employee has been officially disciplined for being absent without leave for more than 5 days in any calendar year; or
An employee has been officially disciplined for violations of the Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive Branch (5 CFR 2635, Subpart G) for viewing, downloading, or exchanging pornography, including child pornography on a Federal Government computer or while performing Federal Government duties; or
The employee’s performance during the performance year falls below the fully successful level.
990-1-90  Determining The Official Worksite
For employees covered by a WFA, the agency must determine the employee’s official worksite on a case-by case basis pursuant to the criteria under 5 CFR 531.605(d). This determination will be made by the HR Center. The official worksite must be documented on an employee's Notification of Personnel Action (Standard Form 50 or equivalent).

Teleworking Employees (Regular, Situational/Ad-hoc, Temporary full-time).
The official worksite is the location of the agency worksite for the employee’s position (the place where the employee normally reports for work on non-telework days), as long as the employee is scheduled to report physically at least twice each bi-weekly pay period on a regular and recurring basis to the agency worksite.
For an employee whose work location varies on a recurring basis, the employee need not work at least twice each bi-weekly pay period at the agency worksite (where the employee's work activities are based) as long as the employee is regularly performing work within the locality pay area for that worksite.
Remote Employees. The official worksite is the approved alternative worksite, typically the employee’s home address, as long as the employee is not scheduled to report at least twice each bi-weekly pay period on a regular and recurring basis.
990-1-100  Work Related Injuries At The Alternative Worksite
All HHS employees are covered under the Federal Employees' Compensation Act (FECA) for injuries or occupational illness while performing official duties.

Employees must immediately report any accident or injury occurring at the alternative worksite to the employee's supervisor.
The supervisor must respond immediately, and within 24 hours of being notified by the employee, report the injury or illness to the appropriate Human Resources Center as a possible workers' compensation incident.
990-1-110  Dependent Care
While telework is not a substitute for dependent care, it can be a very valuable flexibility to employees with caregiving responsibilities by eliminating time required to commute and expanding employees' choices as to dependent care.

Employees may not telework with the intent of or for the sole purpose of meeting their dependent care responsibilities while performing official duties.  While performing official duties, teleworkers and remote workers are expected to arrange for dependent care just as they would if they were working at an agency worksite; however, telework may be used as part of a more flexible work arrangement.
The flexibilities in the WFP may be leveraged to assist employees in managing and balancing dependent care responsibilities and job-related responsibilities.  However, employees should not be engaging in dependent care activities when performing official duties.
990-1-120  Leave, Early Dismissals, and Closures
Employees with a WFA are required to telework on days that they are regularly scheduled to report to the agency worksite when the Federal Government has announced unscheduled leave, unscheduled telework, delayed arrival, early departures, or that Federal offices are closed to the public.
Employees with a WFA are also required to follow established leave procedures to account for time the employee is not performing work during a scheduled tour of duty.
Weather and Safety Leave
Employees with a WFA who are scheduled to report to the agency worksite will be required to work in the event of a weather and safety emergency in accordance with their agreement and if able to safely perform work, or to request leave to account for hours work is not performed during a scheduled tour of duty.
Employees with a WFA who may be onsite at the agency worksite during a weather and safety emergency may be required to resume working upon arrival to their alternative worksite and complete their tour of duty or to request leave to account for hours work is not performed during a scheduled tour of duty.
Weather and safety leave is permitted for employees with a WFA if the employee is unable to safely perform work at the alternate worksite (e.g., power outage due to a storm, flooding, local security concerns, or other related emergencies).
990-1-130  Continuity of Operations Plan (COOP)
As part of an OpDiv/StaffDiv Continuity of Operations Plan (COOP), telework and remote work must be incorporated into the COOP.
Employees designated as mission critical may be required to report to the agency worksite in the event of the activation of a COOP.
990-1-140  Workplace Flexibilities Approval, Denial, Suspension & Termination
Participation in the HHS WFP is voluntary and extended to provide the flexibility required of a changing workforce.  WFA may be terminated by the supervisor or the employee at any time.  Reasons for termination may include circumstances wherein the arrangement is no longer conducive to the business needs of the organization, the employee's performance diminishes, or the employee's circumstances change and they request an adjustment.

An employee must request and obtain approval from their supervisor, consistent with Section 990-1-60, to participate in the Workplace Flexibilities Program.
An employee's request for workplace flexibilities may be approved as submitted, modified, or denied by the supervisor.
If a request is denied or modified, the supervisor must provide the employee a written notice detailing the reason(s) for the decision within five workdays of the disapproval or modification.
A WFA must be terminated by the supervisor under these circumstances:
If the employee has been officially disciplined for being absent without leave for more than five (5) workdays in any calendar year.  The term “official discipline” refers to a disciplinary action that results in the placement of a document in an employee's official personnel file (OPF).
If the employee has been officially disciplined for violations of the Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive Branch (5 CFR 2365, Subpart G) for viewing, downloading, or exchanging pornography, including child pornography, on a Federal Government computer or while performing official Federal Government duties.
If telework continues to diminish employee or agency performance, even after attempts to mitigate such diminishment have been attempted;
The employee does not comply with the terms of the WFA agreement.
If a WFA is being terminated, the employee will receive a reasonable amount of time to make arrangements to report to the agency worksite on a daily basis. In general, this is at a minimum a full bi-weekly pay-period for telework and remote – within the local commuting area employees, and two full bi-weekly pay periods for employees designated remote - outside the local commuting area.
Suspension of Telework or Remote Work. The agency mission may require a suspension of telework or remote work for a period of time to meet the urgent or emergency situation. Examples may include, but are not limited to, a national emergency, a mission critical-related emergency, a new mission or program establishment.
In these unusual situations, the agency will provide written notice and will endeavor to provide the impacted employee(s) with as much advance notice as possible.
Remote WFA Termination
If the WFA for remote work is terminated by the supervisor because the arrangement no longer meets the business needs of the organization, and the supervisor reassigns the employee to the agency worksite or other official worksite, the employee is entitled to relocation reimbursement.
If a WFA for remote work is terminated for cause such as, diminished performance or conduct violations, and the supervisor elects to reassign the employee to the agency worksite, the employee is not entitled to relocation reimbursement.
990-1-150  Training Requirement
All HHS employees are required to complete annual Workplace Flexibilities Training to participate in the WFP and to ensure the readiness of the HHS workforce in the event of an emergency or continuing operations environment.

990-1-160  Documentation, Reporting, and Accountability
Documentation.  Records associated with personnel actions, including workplace flexibility agreements and documentation sufficient for third party reconstruction purposes, must be retained according to the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) schedule.  Generally, all records created in a given year must be retained for a total of three (3) years.  Records involved in litigation and grievance processes may be destroyed only after official notification is received from OPM, Department of Justice, courts, or the Office of the General Counsel, etc. that the matter has been fully litigated or resolved and closed.
Accountability.
Each OpDiv/StaffDiv shall identify a Workplace Flexibilities Program Manager (WFPM) whose responsibilities shall include, but not be limited to:
In coordination with the Department's WFPO, establish annual goals for program participation in each of the program areas (e.g., remote work, routine telework, situational telework, and flexible work schedules), and outcomes in productivity, employee engagement, and recruitment and retention.
Assess the impact of the WFP on employee engagement, individual and organizational performance, and retention and recruitment to promote a highly skilled and diverse workforce, at least annually.
Managing the annual training requirement for the program and ensuring all participants in the program have successfully completed training as required.
Managing the annual renewal of the WFA ensuring all program participants have active agreements in place by November 30th, for the subsequent program year (January 1 – December 31).
Maintaining records related to the administration of the WFP within their organization and meeting the Department reporting requirements.
Reporting.
HHS is required to report agency WFP participation data annually to OPM.  To satisfy this obligation, the ASA/OHR will solicit relevant data quarterly.  WFP Program Managers are required to submit a telework report to ASA/OHR at mailto:Telework@hhs.gov.  Reporting elements may include:
The number of employees participating in the WFP.
An assessment of progress in optimizing the WFP and other goals relating to:
Emergency readiness
Energy use
Recruitment and retention
Performance productivity
Employee attitudes and opinions regarding remote work
Best practices in OpDiv/StaffDiv remote work program
Accountability. ASA/OHR may conduct periodic accountability reviews to analyze compliance with this Instruction, HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and applicable federal laws and regulations
Appendix I - Workplace Flexibilities Agreement, HHS Form 990-1 - PDF
HHS 990-1 - Alternative Worksite Best Practices Checklist - PDF
HHS 990-1 - Technology Equipment Checklist - PDF
Contact telework@hhs.gov for checklists on Alternative Worksite Best Practices and Technology Equipment.























293-3

Material Transmitted:

HHS Instruction 293-3, Employee Performance File System Records

Material Superseded:
HHS Instruction 293-3 (all)

Background:
This Instruction has been revised consistent with recent changes in the organization of HHS, and in support of HHS administrative initiatives calling for more streamlined rules and greater delegations of authority.

This issuance streamlines the rules and updates the Instruction's contents. 

Any reference to "OPDIV" in this Instruction now includes AHCPR, ATSDR, CDC, FDA, HRSA, IHS, NIH, SAMHSA, the Office of the Secretary, the Program Support Center, HCFA, ACF, and AOA.

This issuance is effective immediately. Implementation under this issuance must be carried out in accordance with applicable laws and bargaining agreements.

Filing Instructions:
Remove superseded material and file new material. Post receipt of this transmittal to the HHS Check List of Transmittals and file this transmittal in sequential order after the check list.





                                   Eugene Kinlow
                                   Deputy Assistant Secretary for
                                   Human Resources, OASMB
INSTRUCTION 293-3  
 
HHS PERSONNEL INSTRUCTION 293-3
EMPLOYEE PERFORMANCE FILE (EPF) SYSTEM RECORDS

293-3-00  Purpose
      10  References
      20  Coverage
      30  Departmental Requirements
      40  Privacy and Freedom of Information Act Considerations
      50  Access to the EPF Record System
      60  Disposition Requirements

      Exhibit 293-3-A, Access to Employee Performance File System Records 

293-3-00 PURPOSE

This Instruction states the policies and requirements of this Department relative to the establishment, maintenance, retention, disposal, and safeguarding of EPF system records.

293-3-10 REFERENCES

A.  5 U.S. Code 552a (law - Privacy Act - records maintained on individuals)
B.  5 CFR, Part 293 (regulations - personnel records)
C.  5 CFR, Part 294 (regulations - availability of official information)
D.  5 CFR, Part 297 (regulations - privacy procedures for personnel records)
E.  5 CFR, Part 430.209 (regulations - disposition of records)
F.  45 CFR, Part 5b (regulations - HHS Privacy Act regulations)
G.  The Guide for Personnel Recordkeeping (Office of Personnel Management (OPM) Operating Manual, dated November 30, 1994, and March 15, 1996)
H.  HHS Personnel Instruction 293-1 (personnel and equal employment records disposal)
I.  HHS Personnel Instruction 297-1 (protection of privacy in personnel records systems)
J.	HHS Performance Management Plan (dated April 26, 1993)
K.	HHS Personnel Instruction 430-6 (performance management for members of the senior executive service)
L.  HHS Personnel Instruction 430-7 (performance appraisal system)

293-3-20 COVERAGE

This Instruction applies to all employees of this Department, regardless of pay plan, grade, or occupational group, except Commissioned Corps officers and Senior Biomedical Research Service members

293-3-30 DEPARTMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

A.  Each personnel office must establish an EPF record system for each employee for whom it maintains an Official Personnel Folder (OPF), including members of the Senior Executive Service (SES).  These records may be maintained either in an envelope kept in the employee's OPF or in a separate file maintained in either the personnel office or other office as authorized by regulation.

B.  The EPF system established for non-SES employees must contain the following records or any other supporting documents for the period indicated:

                     Record 				    Retention Period

    1.  Annual rating of record issued under a 		4 years
        performance appraisal program within the
        HHS performance appraisal system.

    2.  After the final appraisal is issued, any 		4 years
        form which identifies job elements and
        the standards for those elements, with
        any changes thereto, including appraisal
        information on those elements, if recorded.

C.  The EPF system established for SES members must contain the following records or any other supporting documents for the period indicated:


                   Record 				    Retention Period

    1.  Annual rating of record issued under			5 years
        an SES appraisal system.

    2.  After the final rating of record is issued, 	5 years
        any SES performance appraisal form which 
        identifies job elements and standards for 
        those elements, with any changes thereto, 
        including appraisal information on those
        elements, if recorded.

    3.  Documented progress reviews and narrative 	5 years
        description of performance. 

    4.  Any supporting documentation for a particu- 	5 years
        lar evaluation that is submitted with the
        performance appraisal form (including 
        written statements of the employee).
 
    5.  Records pertaining to SES appraisals 		5 years
        which support recommendations made by
        Performance Review Boards.

    6.  Any form or other document regarding 		5 years
        performance-related decisions or recommen-
        dations of an Executive Resources Board.

    7.  Any form or other document used to 			5 years
        recommend an individual for Meritorious
        or Distinguished Executive Rank and records
        supporting the recommendation.

293-3-40 PRIVACY AND FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT CONSIDERATIONS

A.  Performance-related records designated as EPF system records are Privacy Act records and are covered by 5 U.S. Code 552a, 5 CFR, Part 293, and "The Guide to Personnel Recordkeeping"  (OPM Operating Manual).

B.  Individuals responsible for maintaining EPF system records must insure that their maintenance, retention, and disposal are in accordance with the requirements of the Privacy Act (5 U.S. Code 552a), OPM's applicable regulations (5 CFR, Part 293 and 297), the Department's Privacy Act regulations (45 CFR, Part 5b), and HHS Personnel Instructions 293-1 and   297-1.

293-3-50 ACCESS TO THE EPF RECORD SYSTEM

Individuals whose records are maintained (whether in a manual, automated, or microform mode) in the Privacy Act system of records have the very broad rights relative to them granted by the Privacy Act and the Department regulations implementing that statute.  These include a right of access to the records, a right to request amendment and/or correction of a record, a right to request a review of any refusal to amend or correct a record, a right to have included in the record a statement of reasons for the employee's disagreement with any refusal to 
amend or correct, and a right to have that statement included in any disclosure of the disputed portion of the record. Information and guidance on providing these rights to employees are contained in 5 CFR, Part 297 and HHS Personnel Instruction 297-1.
(See Exhibit 293-3-A for detailed information on the release of records in the EPF record system under the Privacy Act.)

293-3-60 DISPOSITION REQUIREMENTS

A.  When the OPF of a non-SES employee is sent to another servicing personnel office within the Department, another Federal agency or to the National Personnel Records Center, the EPF shall accompany the OPF and include all performance ratings of record that are 4 years old or less, including the performance plan on which the most recent rating of record was based, and the summary rating prepared when the employee changes positions.  Prior to its transfer, the EPF will be purged of all performance ratings and performance plans that are more than 4 years old, and other performance-related records.  These purged records are to be disposed of in accordance with "The Guide to Personnel Recordkeeping" (OPM Operating Manual) and 5 CFR, Part 293. 

B.	When an SES member moves to another SES position, all appropriate performance-related documents five years old or less shall be forwarded in the EPF along with the individual’s OPF.


 
Exhibit 293-3-A, Access to Employee Performance File System Records 

A.  Access Under the Privacy Act

    1.  Employee Performance File (EPF) system records are records within a system of records for purposes of the Privacy Act. Therefore, all of the rights and limitations conferred by that statute, and Office of Personnel Management (OPM) and Department regulations and "The Guide to Personnel Recordkeeping" (OPM Operating Manual, dated November 30, 1994, and March 15, 1996) apply to them (see HHS Personnel Instruction 297-1, Protection of Privacy in Personnel Records Systems). 

    2.  Instruction 293-3-60A details the rights of individuals whose records are maintained in the Privacy Act system of records.  In addition, it is Department policy that employees receive from their supervisors copies of performance plans, progress reviews, and performance appraisals.  Supporting documentation used in whole or in part as a basis for a performance appraisal, or performance-based action, is covered by the Privacy Act and must be released to the employee to whom it pertains, if and when a proper Privacy Act request is made by the employee.  This includes personal "supervisory" notes              (memory joggers), unless:

        a.  the Department and any of its components exercise no control over them, and

        b.  their maintenance is not required under the applicable performance appraisal system, and

        c.  they remain for the personal use of the author and are not provided to any other persons, and

        d.  they are prepared, retained or discarded at the author’s sole discretion, and

        e.  they are not used in appraising an employee or in determining any rights, benefits, or privileges of an employee.

        If all of the above conditions are met, then such notes are considered to be merely an extension of the supervisor’s memory, not records or documents subject to either the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) or the Privacy Act.

    3.  The only other conditions under which EPF records may be disclosed, under the Privacy Act, are the statutory conditions of disclosure in the Privacy Act, codified at 5 U.S. Code 552a(b).  The three most significant of these allow the disclosure of EPF system records: 

        a.  to Department employees who need to have access to the records in order to do their jobs;

        b.  when their release is required under the FOIA; and

        c.  for an established routine use.  This is limited to those routine uses established by OPM in the record system notice for EPF records. 

B.  Access Under the FOIA

    1.  The Privacy Act provides no authority to withhold information that must be released under the FOIA.

    2.  The FOIA (5 U.S. Code 552) and the Department regulations implementing that statute (45 CFR, Part 5) require the release of records and information maintained in the Department unless one of the nine discretionary exceptions in the Acts (5 U.S. Code 552(b)(1)-(9)) or any other statutory provision against disclosure can properly be claimed as a basis for denying release.

    3.  The principal FOIA exemption applicable to requests for EPF system records is the (b)(6) exemption.  This exempts from disclosure "personnel and medical files and similar files the disclosure of which would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy" (5 U.S. Code 552(b)(6)).  This exemption may be invoked only where there is an invasion of personal privacy that is clearly  unwarranted.  In making this determination a balancing of interests is undertaken.  This balancing involves on one side the potential severity of the privacy invasion to the individuals mentioned in the records and on the other the public interest to be served by disclosure.

4.	Only officials designated at 45 CFR, Part 5.32 are authorized to make a determination to release or deny records requested under the FOIA (see 45 CFR, Part 5.53).

    5.  Release of any of the documents or information listed below is not a clearly unwarranted invasion of the privacy of any individual.  Therefore, the (b)(6) FOIA exemption cannot be claimed as a basis to withhold:    

        a.  information released in a form that is not personally identifiable;

        b.  the gross salary of an employee and, if requested, each element of the gross (i.e., base and comparability increase);

        c.  performance objectives and plans (except actual evaluations recorded on the same form);

        d.  justification/nomination of employees who receive SES rank awards and bonuses, and/or cash awards (except performance appraisal documents); and
 
        e.  the amount of SES bonuses and performance-based cash awards.

        In certain limited circumstances, consideration may be given to withholding certain EPF system documents or information if their release would have an adverse impact on a Department component's programs or mission and if one of the other eight discretionary exemptions in the Act can be claimed as a basis for the withholding.

    6.  Performance evaluation information on EPF system records and documents is not to be released under the FOIA in a personally identifiable form.  The authority for this withholding is the (b)(6) exemption discussed above.  This authority would not apply to other information on performance appraisal records and documents to which the (b)(6) exemption does not apply.  Remember that only a very limited number of Department officials have the authority to release or deny information requested under the FOIA. You must ensure that the procedures for responding to FOIA requests established within your component or region are followed.    
























430-1
HHS Instruction 430-1: Performance Management Appraisal Program (PMAP)
Effective Date 01/01/2023

Material Transmitted:
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 430-1, PMAP Policy, dated 11/22/2022

Material Superseded:
HHS Instruction 430-1, Performance Management Appraisal Program, dated August 4, 2011

HHS Instruction 430-4 and 430-7, Performance Management Appraisal Program, dated October 3, 2011

Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 430-1, PMAP Policy, dated 12/03/2020

Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 430-1, PMAP Policy, dated 11/09/2022

Background:
This Instruction has been revised to reflect a culture of high performance, clarify coverage and exclusions, replace the standard administrative critical element with a customer experience standard element, and define terms used in the performance management program.

This policy is effective January 1, 2023 and must be carried out in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, bargaining agreements, and Departmental policy.

W. Robert Leavitt
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources
and Chief Human Capital Officer

Subject: Performance Management Appraisal Program
430-1-00 Purpose
430-1-10 References
430-1-20 Coverage and Exclusions
430-1-30 Definitions
430-1-40 Responsibilities
430-1-50 Performance Management Cycle
430-1-60 Performance Planning
430-1-70 Rating Performance
430-1-80 Recognizing and Rewarding Performance
430-1-90 Appraisal Program Requirements
430-1-100 Documentation and Accountability

430-1-00 Purpose
This Instruction establishes the authority for the Performance Management Appraisal Program (PMAP) within the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) and implements a 5-tier rating system consisting of the following levels of performance:  Achieved Outstanding Results (AO), Achieved More than Expected Results (AM), Achieved Expected Results (AE), Partially Achieved Expected Results (PA), and Achieved Unsatisfactory Results (UR).

See the HHS PMAP Handbook for in-depth information and instructions on how to execute the policy.

When provisions of this policy differ from changes in applicable law or regulation, the changes in law or regulation apply. 

430-1-10 References
5 U.S.C. Chapter 43, Performance Appraisal, and 5 CFR Part 430, Performance Management
5 U.S.C. §§4303 and 4305 and 5 CFR Part 432.104, Achieved Unsatisfactory Results (UR) Performance
5 U.S.C. Chapter 45 and 5 CFR Part 451, Awards
5 U.S.C. §§5335 and 5304 and 5 CFR Part 531, Subpart D, Within-Grade Increases
5 U.S.C. §5336 and 5 CFR Part 531, Subpart E, Quality Step Increases
5 U.S.C. §3502 and 5 CFR §351.504, Reduction-in-Force
5 U.S.C. §§552a and 5 CFR §293.404 and 5 CFR §293.405, Employee Performance Records
5 CFR §432.104, Addressing Unacceptable Performance
Executive Order 13839, Promoting Accountability and Streamlining Removal Procedures Consistent with Merit System Principles, May 25, 2018
OMB Memorandum, Comprehensive Plan for Reforming the Federal Government and Reducing the Federal Civilian Workforce (M-17-22), April 17, 2017
HHS Performance Management Appraisal Program Handbook, 2016
All applicable HHS Collective Bargaining Agreements
430-1-20 Coverage and Exclusions
This Instruction applies to all HHS employees except the following:
Members of the Senior Executive Service (SES); Senior Level (SL); or Scientific and professional (ST);
A Title 42 employee who is covered under the HHS SES performance system;
An employee appointed to the excepted service under Schedule A, 5 CFR § 213.3102(o) whose appointment is limited to one (1) year or less;
An expert or consultant appointed under 5 U.S.C. § 3109;
A member of the Public Health Service Commissioned Corps;
A member of an advisory committee;
A person serving under an appointment in the excepted service having a time limit of less than sixty (60) calendar days;
An employee on detail to a public international organization;
An employee in a position for which employment is not reasonably expected to exceed sixty (60) calendar days in a consecutive twelve-month period;
An employee outside the United States who is paid in accordance with local native prevailing wage rates for the area in which employed;
An Administrative Law Judge appointed under 5 U.S.C. § 3105;
An individual appointed by the President; and
An individual who is serving in a position under a temporary appointment for less than one year, agrees to serve without a performance evaluation, and will not be considered for a reappointment or for an increase in pay based in whole or in part on performance.
430-1-30 Definitions
Acceptable Level of Competence:  Performance by an employee that warrants advancement of the employee's rate of basic pay to the next higher step of the grade or the next higher rate within the grade (as defined in this section) of his or her position, subject to the requirements of § 531.404 of this subpart, as determined by the head of the agency (or designee). § 531.403 Definitions.
Achieved Expected Results (AE) Level of Performance:  An employee’s performance of the duties and responsibilities of their assigned position reflects at least the “Achieved Expected Results (AE)” level in all critical elements.  The employee fully meets the expectations outlined in the standards; the results meet the standards for quality, quantity, and/or timeliness associated with the objective and were achieved with the appropriate level of guidance.  Performance must be at this level for the employee to receive a within-grade increase to the next higher step of the grade, or the next higher grade in a career ladder promotion.
Achieved More Than Expected Results (AM) Level of Performance:  The employee consistently exceeds expectations of “Achieved Expected Results (AE)” performance requirements, continually demonstrates successful collaborations within the work environment, overcomes significant organizational challenges, and works productively and strategically with others in non-routine matters, some of which may be complex and sensitive.  The employee consistently demonstrates the highest level of integrity and accountability in achieving HHS program and management goals.
Achieved Outstanding Results (AO) Level of Performance:  The employee produces results that significantly exceed expectations and/or result in uncommon successes, are consistently superior, and/or exceed performance requirements.  Despite major challenges such as changing priorities, insufficient resources, unanticipated resource shortages, or externally-driven parameters, employee performance is a model of excellence.  Contributions impact well beyond the employee’s level of responsibility.  The employee demonstrates exceptional initiative in achieving results critical to Departmental success and strategic goals.  Products and skills create significant changes in their area of responsibility and authority.
Achieved Unsatisfactory Results (UR) Level of Performance:  The employee fails to achieve the successful level of performance standard in one or more critical ele­ments even though circumstances allowed for its achievement. “Achieved Unsatisfactory Results (UR)” performance can result in the employee’s reassignment, removal, or reduction grade.
Appraisal Cycle:  The appraisal cycle is typically twelve (12) months.
Appraisal Period:  The time period that a performance plan is in effect.
Critical Elements:  A critical element is a work assignment or responsibility of such importance that “Achieved Unsatisfactory Results (UR)” performance on the element would result in the determination that the employee’s overall performance is Achieved Unsatisfactory Results (UR).  All elements in the HHS performance plan are considered critical.  The performance plan has a maximum of six (6) critical elements.
Forced Distribution of Summary Ratings:  A prohibited method of distributing performance ratings by assessing an individual’s performance relative to their colleagues instead of against documented standards.
Interim Rating:  A rating that is assigned when an employee has served at least 901 days under a performance plan and changes positions during the Appraisal Period.  Position changes may be temporary (e.g. a detail or temporary promotion) or permanent.  This may happen more than once during the rating period.
Measures:  Targets or indicators of quality, quantity, timeliness, or cost effectiveness used to determine work unit and employee performance.
Minimum Period of Performance:  The minimum period of performance that must be completed before a performance rating can be prepared is 90 days.  An employee must be placed on a performance plan with critical elements assigned for a minimum of 90 days for a rating to be assigned.  In the event the performance plan is revised during the appraisal period, and a critical element is changed with less than 90 days remaining in the appraisal period, the employee’s performance may not be evaluated and a No Rating (NR) must be assigned to that element.
No Rating:  This rating is assigned to an element when the employee’s performance cannot be evaluated, typically in the case that the Minimum Period of Performance has not been met, or if the employee’s duties changed but were not reflected in the PMAP.  An NR rating does not negatively impact a summary rating or Rating of Record.
Partially Achieved Expected Results (PA):  This is the minimum level of acceptable performance for retention on the job and improvement is necessary.  The employee has difficulties in meeting expectations.  Actions taken by the employee are sometimes inappropriate or marginally effective.  Organizational goals and objectives are met only as a result of close supervision.
Performance Management Appraisal Program Coordinator:  PMAP Coordinators, identified by their respective Operating Division or Staff Division (OpDiv or StaffDiv), are performance management liaisons for the operations of the PMAP who share knowledge and best practices across HHS and provide essential advice, guidance, coordination, and support to their organization.
Performance Standards:  The written benchmarks against which performance of each element is evaluated and given a rating level.
Performance Management:  A systematic process by which an agency involves its employees, as individuals and members of a group, in improving organizational effectiveness in the accomplishment of agency mission and goals.
Progress Review:  A periodic assessment of an employee’s performance that occurs at least once during the Appraisal Period at the mid-point of the appraisal cycle.
Quality Step Increase:  An increase in the employee's rate of basic pay from one step to the next higher step of the grade.  Only an employee who receives a rating of record at “Achieved Outstanding Results (AO)” is eligible.
Rating of Record:  The overall summary rating for all of the critical elements in an employee’s PMAP, which is provided at the end of the appraisal cycle provided that the employee has completed the minimum period of performance as required for a rating.
Rating Official:  The Rating Official is typically the employee’s immediate supervisor.  However, a Rating Official can be any delegated official who is in a supervisory or managerial position with oversight or responsibility for the day-to-day supervision of that employee.
Reviewing Official:  The Reviewing Official has review and approval authority above the Rating Official and is ordinarily two supervisory levels above the employee.
Summary Rating:  The term used to describe the employee’s overall performance level.  The summary rating averages each individual critical element and may be “Achieved Outstanding Results (AO)”, “Achieved More Than Expected Results (AM)”, Achieved Expected Results (AE)”, “Partially Achieved Expected Results (PA)”, “Achieved Unsatisfactory Results (UR)”, or “Not Rated (NR).”
Within Grade Increase:  An increase in an employee's rate of basic pay from one step of the grade of their position to the next step of that grade.  This is granted when the employee has met the waiting period and has received at least an “Achieved Expected Results (AE)” level of performance on their most recent Rating of Record.
430-1-40 Responsibilities
 HHS Assistant Secretary for Administration (ASA), Office of Human Resources (HHS OHR)
Develops Department-wide human resources guidance and policy consistent with HHS and Office of Personnel Management (OPM) policy, procedures and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Periodically reviews OpDiv/StaffDiv procedures, actions, and reports to assure conformance with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources and Chief Human Capital Officer (CHCO)
Provides policy oversight and direction on issues that arise;
Develops Department-wide policies and guidance regarding Performance Management consistent with HHS and OPM policies, procedures, guidance and all applicable federal laws and regulations;
Attains OPM approval as necessary and/or required;
Monitors and evaluates HHS’s Performance Management Appraisal Program for compliance with applicable laws and regulations, including Merit System Principles and Prohibited Personnel Practices;
Ensures all components of the Department provide Performance Management Training for supervisors and for non-supervisors.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Human Resources Offices
Comply with this Instruction, any HHS and OPM policies, procedures, guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations;
Ensure performance records are retained in accordance with OPM regulations and HHS policy as stated in section 430-1-110 of this document.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Heads
Delegate appropriate authority to supervisors and other officials, as required, to effectively implement and operate under the PMAP in a manner consistent with the law and HHS policy, and to promote a performance-based culture;
Develop and communicate OpDiv and/or StaffDiv goals, initiatives, and priorities used in developing individual performance plans;
Hold supervisors accountable for the accomplishment of their performance management duties;
Ensure employees and supervisors participate in appropriate performance management training, as required by regulations.
PMAP Coordinators
Assist in providing training and information to supervisors and employees on the HHS PMAP;
Provide support and guidance for linking performance to higher-level organizational goals, and for establishing performance plans with results-focused performance elements and credible standards;
Provide assistance and guidance to supervisors and employees in the execution of their PMAP responsibilities;
Conduct PMAP reviews to evaluate compliance, determine the need for program improvements and make recommendations;
Provide required reports and documentation of Performance Management activities to support HHS and OPM accountability reviews;
Provide assistance to supervisors and employees in dealing with the appeal process, and on procedures for dealing with “Achieved Unsatisfactory Results (UR)” performance by facilitating coordination with Labor and Employee Relations (LER).
Reviewing Officials
Review performance plans with ratings at the “Achieved Unsatisfactory Results (UR)” level, and advise the Rating Official of findings, recommendations and next steps;
Hold Rating Officials accountable for developing specific, measurable, attainable, relevant, and timely performance standards and ensure employees are given the necessary support and resources to perform at or above the “Achieved Expected Results (AE)” level of performance;
Refer Rating Official to LER for consultation, as needed.
Upon request, provide a second-level review of a summary rating and either change or concur with the rating.
Rating Officials
Promote a performance-based culture and environment which fosters a results-oriented work unit by establishing open, two-way communication with employees on work expectations and requirements;
Engage employees in the process of establishing performance plans and provide the employee with a signed copy of the plan within the first 30 days of the beginning of the appraisal cycle, entry on duty into a new position, or beginning of a detail expected to exceed 89 days;
Manage the full performance cycle including:
communicating performance expectations clearly and ensuring employees understand what is expected;
holding employees accountable; monitoring performance during the appraisal period, and providing regular performance feedback to employees;
modifying the performance plan to account for changes in the employee’s job duties or shifting priorities;
appropriately recognizing and rewarding employee performance;
developing employees by providing substantive feedback and stretch goals; and
taking appropriate actions to address performance determined to be below the “Achieved Expected Results (AE)” level.
Ensure that plans meet all requirements as outlined in this policy;
Conduct progress reviews required by this policy;
If, at any time during the performance cycle, an employee’s performance is at the “Partially Achieved Expected Results (PA)” level, immediately contact LER and notify the Reviewing Official;
Prepare ratings of record within 30 days of the end of the Appraisal Cycle, unless an exception or non-standard situation applies, and equitably consider employees who demonstrate noteworthy performance for appropriate recognition;
Complete required supervisory Performance Management training as assigned by the PMAP Coordinator.
Employees
Provide input and feedback to the Rating Official in the development of performance elements, standards, and measures;
Request clarification of performance expectations from the Rating Official, if necessary;
Perform at full potential, support team endeavors, and pursue professional development to support performance and results;
Identify issues, or other obstacles, which may hinder the accomplishment of performance expectations, and work with the Rating Official to resolve them;
Continuously seek performance feedback;
Participate in progress reviews and performance appraisals by providing input to the Rating Official on accomplishments toward achieving performance expectations;
Complete required Performance Management training as assigned by the PMAP Coordinator.
Labor and Employee Relations staff consult with supervisors with regard to performance-related issues requiring corrective action.
430-1-50 Performance Management Cycle
The appraisal cycle is on a calendar year cycle beginning on January 1 of each year and ending on December 31.
Rating Officials will consistently measure employee performance and provide ongoing oral or written feedback to employees on their progress toward reaching their performance goals.  Rating Officials will meet with employees three times per year to give feedback on the employee’s performance.  The reviews may incorporate feedback from key stakeholders and from the employee.  These reviews typically will occur to establish the performance plan, to provide a mid-year review, and to close out the performance plan with a rating of record.
The Rating Official must engage LER if, at any time, the employee’s performance is less than the “Achieved Expected Results (AE)” level.
430-1-60 Performance Planning
Rating Officials will set performance expectations and goals for employees to channel their efforts toward achieving organizational objectives.  Performance elements and standards should be SMART – specific, measurable, attainable, relevant, and timely.
Either the employee or the Rating Official may initiate the performance plan.
Standards must be written at the “Achieved Expected Results (AE)” level and be based on the requirements of the position.  If substantive changes are made to critical elements and performance standards, the changes are effective when presented in writing to the employee. The employee must be granted a minimum of 901 days to demonstrate acceptable performance before being evaluated on those elements.
All performance plans must link at least one critical element to the organizational Strategic Plan at the Department, Operating Division, or Staff Division level, and must include relevant tasks at the appropriate level of responsibility of the position.
Required Performance Elements
Supervisory employees must have a minimum of three (3) but no more than six (6) critical elements. These must include:
HHS standard Leadership Element
Supervisors will have a set of required performance standards.
Supervisors may not remove or edit the established standards but may include additional standards.
Customer Experience Element.  While the element definition cannot be changed, Rating Officials can include custom performance standards under the element.
At least one (1) individual Critical Element.
Non-supervisory employees must have a minimum of two (2), but no more than six (6) critical elements. These must include:
HHS standard Customer Experience Element, applicable to all employees, and
At least one (1) individual Critical Element.
All performance plans include at least one critical element linked to the organizational Strategic Plan at the Department, Operational Division, or Staff Division level, and include relevant tasks at the appropriate level of responsibility of the position.
430-1-70 Rating Performance
Employees who have been under a documented performance plan for 901 days or more should receive a Rating of Record at the end of the appraisal period.  When required by the OpDiv/StaffDiv, the Rating Official should obtain the Reviewing Official’s signature prior to discussion of the final rating with the employee. 

Determining Element Ratings:  Ratings are based on a comparison of performance with the standards established for the appraisal period.  Rating Officials, at the end of the annual appraisal period, should solicit performance input from former supervisors for those employees who have changed positions or supervisors during the appraisal period.  (see Table 1).
Element Comments:  Written comments are recommended for each element rated higher or lower than “Achieved Expected Results (AE).”
Table 1: Critical Element Ratings	Points Assigned
Level 5: Achieved Outstanding Results (AO)	5.00
Level 4: Achieved More Than Expected Results (AM)	4.00
Level 3: Achieved Expected Results (AE)	3.00
Level 2: Partially Achieved Expected Results (PA)	2.00
Level 1: Achieved Unsatisfactory Results (UR) 	1.00
Determining Summary Rating:  Summary ratings are determined based on a review of all the critical element ratings.
After rating and assigning a score to each critical element, the Rating Official will total the points and divide that by the number of critical elements to arrive at an average score (up to two decimal places).
This score will be converted to a summary rating using the point values in Table II.
If an employee receives a “Partially Achieved Expected Results (PA)” rating on one or more critical elements, he or she cannot receive a summary rating of higher than “Achieved Expected Results (AE)”.
A summary rating of “Achieved Unsatisfactory Results (UR)” must be assigned to any employee who is rated “Achieved Unsatisfactory Results (UR)” on any critical element.
An element rating of Not Rated (NR) will not affect the average score used to determine the summary rating.
Table II: Summary Ratings	Points
Level 5: Achieved Outstanding Results (AO)	4.50 to 5.00
Level 4: Achieved More Than Expected Results (AM)	3.60 to 4.49
Level 3: Achieved Expected Results (AE)	3.00 to 3.59
Level 2: Partially Achieved Expected Results (PA)	2.00 to 2.99
Level 1: Achieved Unsatisfactory Results (UR) 	1.00 to 1.99
Narrative Summaries:  Rating Officials must provide a narrative summary rating when an employee’s performance is at the “Achieved Unsatisfactory Results (UR)” or “Achieved Outstanding Results (AO)” level.  The narrative should contain examples of the employee’s performance which substantiate how the employee’s performance falls within the levels assigned.  Narratives are recorded on the performance plan.
Disagreement with Rating:  Recognizing that there may be differences of opinion between employees and Rating Officials on performance assessments and ratings, employees may respond to performance ratings and request reconsideration.  Employee comments become a part of the official appraisal rating of record.
Employees who desire to add such written comments shall have seven (7) calendar days from the date of the issuance of the appraisal.
Employee comments must be reviewed by the Rating and Reviewing Officials to determine whether these comments warrant any changes in the element or summary ratings to be submitted for the record.
Reviewing Officials may elect to change the rating of record. This amended rating will be entered into the performance plan and signed by the Reviewing Official and the employee.
Employees being reduced in grade or removed based on performance have the right to appeal to the Merit Systems Protection Board; or if an employee believes he or she was discriminated against based on any of the protected classes or actions, an EEO complaint may be filed.
430-1-80 Recognizing and Rewarding Performance
Performance awards are linked to the rating of record and are submitted and considered for approval only at the conclusion of the rating period.
All performance awards are at the discretion of the OpDiv/StaffDiv and are subject to funds availability. According to OPM, no employee is entitled to an award.
For more information on recognizing and rewarding performance, please refer to HHS Instruction 451-1, Incentive Awards.
430-1-90 Appraisal Program Requirements
Training Requirements
Rating Officials:  Every Rating Official must be trained in the policies and practices of performance management to ensure its effective administration.  Training on developing performance plans, conducting progress reviews, assigning ratings, coaching, and using appraisals as a key factor in making other management decisions will be provided to managers and supervisors.  Any individual hired into their first supervisory position should receive performance management training within one year of being hired.  Other seasoned supervisors should receive a performance management training at least once every three years.  Rating Officials are expected to explain the system to subordinate employees and provide performance management training to enable them to understand the specific aspects of their performance plan.
Employees:  Employees are recommended to take training within one year of being hired at HHS and at least once every three years thereafter.
Monitoring and Evaluating:  Generally, each OpDiv/StaffDiv has the responsibility for monitoring, evaluating, and auditing its PMAP, including issues arising from, and connected to, performance-based awards, within the framework of these guidelines.  Each OpDiv/StaffDiv should monitor, evaluate, and audit its PMAP at least once every three years.
Recordkeeping and Record Uses:  As part of monitoring performance, supervisors may make notes on significant instances of performance so that the instances will not be forgotten.  Such notes are not required by HHS or any of its OpDivs/StaffDivs. Such notes are not subject to the Privacy Act as long as they:
remain solely for the personal use of the supervisor;
are not provided to any other person;
are not used for any other purposes; and
are retained or discarded at the supervisor's sole discretion.
The retention, maintenance, accessibility, and disposal of performance records, as well as supervisors' copies, will be in accordance with OPM regulations and this policy.

Relationship to Other Personnel Actions
Probationary Periods:  New employees must be closely observed during the probationary/trial period to determine whether they are a good fit for the position.  Periodic progress reviews to assess performance during the probationary period are helpful to validate qualifications and job fitness.  Generally, a probationary employee may be removed at any time during the probationary period for any reason, including demonstrating “Achieved Unsatisfactory Results (UR)” performance; however, the OpDiv/StaffDiv’s LER staff must be consulted prior to initiating any performance based or adverse action to ensure the requirements specified under 5 CFR Parts 432 and 752 are followed and the proposed action is legally supportable (HHS Instruction, 315-1, Probation and Trial Periods).
 Reduction-in-Force (RIF):  Ratings of record are used to establish service credit for RIF purposes.  For RIF purposes, the rating of record is the annual summary rating that is assigned at the end of the appraisal period that was signed, approved, and issued to the employee by an appropriate management official or a rating of record assigned following completion of a performance improvement period.  A Rating Official may not assign an employee a new rating of record for the sole purpose of affecting their retention standing.  Ratings of record that were due before the date of specific RIF notices, but were not officially approved and placed on record until on or after the date of the specific notices, will not be used to determine additional service credit (HHS Instruction, 351-1 Reduction in Force, and 5 CFR Part 351).
430-1-100 Documentation and Accountability
Performance records must be retained for four (4) years, under 5 CFR § 293.404, and transferred with the employee's electronic Official Personnel File (eOPF) when the employee transfers to a new organization within HHS or to another federal agency.
Performance ratings of record, including the performance plans on which they are based, shall be retained for 4 years.  When an employee is reassigned to a new Rating Official within the Department during the performance cycle, that rating plan is closed out, and does not transfer with the employee but is retained in the employee’s eOPF for 4 years.
Supporting documents shall be retained for up to four (4) years.
Performance records superseded (e.g., through an administrative or judicial procedure) shall be destroyed, and performance-related records pertaining to a former employee (except as prescribed in 5 CFR § 293.405(a) shall be retained for a minimum of 2 years.
Notices of proposed demotion or removal issued but not executed, and all related documents, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. § 4303(d) must be destroyed after the employee completes one year of acceptable performance from the date of the written advance notice of the proposed removal or reduction in grade notice.
Except where prohibited by law, retention of automated records longer than the maximum prescribed here is permitted for purposes of statistical analysis so long as the data are not used in any action affecting the employee when the manual record has been or should have been destroyed.
Records associated with personnel actions, including all documentation sufficient for third party reconstruction purposes, must be retained according to the record disposition schedule.  Generally, records created in a given year must be retained for a total of three (3) full years.  Records involved in litigation and grievance processes may be destroyed only after official notification is received from OPM, Department of Justice, courts, the Office of the General Counsel, etc. that the matter has been fully litigated, or resolved, and closed, or if the time limits associated with grievance processes have passed (e.g., before the anniversary date).
OHR will conduct periodic accountability reviews to analyze compliance with this Instruction, HHS and OPM policy and guidance and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Endnotes:
1 Bargaining Unit employees’ minimum performance period may differ and Rating Officials should consult the applicable Collective Bargaining Agreement.



























HHS PMAP Implementation Guide 
HHS PMAP Implementation Guidance
Effective Date: 11/22/2022

Document Change History
Version Number	Release Date	Summary of Changes	Section/Page	Changes Made By
1	01/01/2021	Release	N/A	Human Capital Programs Division
2	01/14/2021	Modification on procedures	Section #, page 2	Human Capital Programs Division
3	12/16/2021	Change of effective date	Section E	Human Capital Programs Division
4	11/09/2022	Modification to clarify policy language	Page 4, 6, 7, &12	Human Capital Programs Division
5	11/22/2022	Change of effective date	Section E	Human Capital Programs Division
Approved:
W. Robert Leavitt, Deputy Assistant Secretary for
Human Resources and Chief Human Capital Officer

A.  Purpose.

This guidance is provided to establish an implementation timeline for HHS Instruction 430-1, The HHS Performance Management Appraisal Program.

B.  Coverage.

This guidance covers all Operating and Staff Divisions with employees subject to the HHS Instruction 430-1, Performance Management Appraisal Program.

C.  References.

HHS Instruction 430-1, Performance Management Appraisal Program, January 1, 2021
HHS Form 704B, Employee Performance Plan
D. Responsibilities.

HHS Assistant Secretary for Administration, Office of Human Resources (OHR):
Develops Department-wide human resources guidance and policy consistent with HHS and OPM policy, procedures and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Periodically reviews Operating Division and Staff Division (OpDiv/StaffDiv) procedures, actions, and reports to ensure conformance with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
OpDiv Human Resources Offices (HROs):
Comply with this guidance, HHS Instruction 430-1, and applicable federal laws and regulations.
E.  Procedures.

Implementing HHS 430-1
The HHS Instruction 430-1, Performance Management Appraisal Program, was updated and signed November 22, 2022, with an implementation date of January 1, 2023.
Operating and Staff Divisions have until January 1, 2023, to update electronic performance management tools to reflect the updates to HHS Instruction 430-1.
Supervisors and employees must sign performance plans for the 2023 performance appraisal period by February 28, 2023.
Operating and Staff Division establishment certification memos are due to HHS OHR by March 31, 2023.
HHS Employees may remain on the HHS Instruction 430-1 in place prior to the updates associated with this implementation guidance until necessary labor management obligations have been completed, but no later than January 1, 2023.
F.  Guidance Information

Owned by: Office of Human Resources, Human Capital Programs Division
Effective date: 11/22/2022
Contact Information: OSPMAP@hhs.gov























HHS PMAP Handbook - Resource Guide for Supervisors and Employees
Introduction
Managing employee performance is an integral part of the work that all managers and rating officials perform throughout the year. It is as important as managing financial resources and program outcomes because the degree of employee performance has a profound effect on both the financial and programmatic components of any organization.

The Performance Management Appraisal Program (PMAP) policy of the Department of Health and Human Services is designed to document the expectations for both individual and organizational performance, provide a meaningful process by which employees can be rewarded for noteworthy contributions to the organization, and provide direction to improve organizational success at every level.

To accomplish these objectives, managers need to identify organizational goals to be accomplished, communicate individual and organizational goals to employees that support the overall strategic mission and the Government Performance and Results Act (GPRA) goals of the Department, monitor and evaluate employee performance, and use performance as a basis for appropriate personnel actions including rewarding noteworthy performance and taking remedial action to improve performance not meeting expectations.

The Office of Personnel Management (OPM) defines performance management as the systematic process of:

Planning work and setting expectations.
Continually monitoring performance.
Developing the capacity to perform.
Periodically rating overall performance.
Rewarding noteworthy performance.
This HHS PMAP Handbook complements the Department’s PMAP policy, dated November 9, 2022, and provides supervisors and employees with a uniform working guide for the day-to-day administration of performance management. This handbook is intended to help supervisors manage employee performance that is aligned with and in support of organizational goals.

This handbook includes step-by-step explanations, and easy-to-follow checklists, for activities conducted throughout the performance cycle, and it standardizes working procedures to ensure consistent conformance to Departmental requirements. As such, this handbook serves as a valuable training resource especially as a quick overview of performance management requirements for supervisors and employees, including new employees. The policy now explicitly excludes all SES-equivalent Title 42 employees.

This handbook provides information and guidance and must not be construed to contradict Departmental PMAP policy or any Collective Bargaining Agreement. Please direct all questions and concerns to the Performance Management Division, Office of the Secretary, at OSPMAP@HHS.GOV.

Importance of Performance Management
In today's workplace, performance improvement and the role of performance management are increasingly popular topics. Why the intense focus on performance management now? Business pressures are ever-increasing and organizations are now required to become even more effective and efficient, execute better business strategies, and do more with less to remain competitive.

The primary reason to ensure performance management processes are functioning properly is to tighten the link between strategic business objectives and day-to-day actions. Effective goal setting (including timelines), combined with a method to track progress and identify obstacles, contribute to success and bottom-line results. Regularly tracking progress against performance goals and objectives also provides the opportunity to recognize and reward employees for performance and exceptional effort, contributing to job satisfaction, and productivity.

What is the impact of a poorly structured and implemented performance management process? If individual goals are not aligned with business strategy, then time and resources are wasted. Low employee engagement levels may mean that individuals are not performing at their best. Inconsistent evaluation criteria and rewards can lead to mistrust, lower productivity, and higher attrition. If top performers see no differentiation in performance ratings, no opportunities, and unfair compensation for under-performers, morale can suffer. Lack of documentation, visibility, and accountability can negatively affect stakeholders who are demanding more transparency. If accurate performance information is unavailable, or difficult to access, training and development decisions, along with project assignment decisions, may not be made in the Department’s, or in the individual's, best interests. An annual process will not adequately alert managers to problems in a timely manner. Last, but not least, a lack of proper documentation related to performance may result in legal issues.

Management "buy-in" is essential to the performance management process. When management does not understand the importance and value of the process, the results can range from consistently late or incomplete appraisals to employee-management mistrust, avoidance of performance discussions, and a lack of honest performance-related discussions. Additionally, managers may feel unprepared to deliver quality feedback and to oversee effective performance discussions.

Frequently, when performance management is mentioned, people think of the employee performance appraisal or review. Performance management, however, involves much more. Properly constructed appraisals should represent a summary of an ongoing and year-long dialogue. An effective performance management process enables managers to evaluate and measure individual performance and optimize productivity by:

Aligning individual employee's day-to-day job responsibilities with strategic business objectives.
Providing visibility and clarifying accountability related to performance expectations.
Documenting individual performance to support compensation and career planning decisions.
Establishing focus for skill development and learning opportunities.
Creating documentation for Departmental purposes to support decisions and reduce disputes.
Many of the practices that support performance also positively impact job satisfaction, employee retention, and engagement; as well as trust and loyalty. Performance management practices include:

Delivering regular relevant job feedback.
Setting and communicating clear performance expectations.
Clearly linking performance to compensation.
Evaluating performance and delivering incentives in a fair and consistent manner.
Providing appropriate learning and development opportunities.
Recognizing and rewarding top performers.
Employees want to feel successful, to do well at their job, and feel they are making a valuable contribution. To ensure this happens, employees need a clear understanding of individual goals and how they fit into the larger organization. When effectively implemented, the best practices of performance management result in a wide range of benefits and successes for employees, managers, and the overall organization in the following ways:

Organizational Benefits of Effective Performance Management
Savings	Time Savings	Clarification of Expectations
Retention	Reduced Conflicts	Improved Self-assessment
Performance	Visible Accountability	Improved Performance
Productivity	Efficiency	Job Satisfaction
The Department is taking steps to implement innovative solutions that ensure processes deliver real results and improve performance. The purpose of this handbook is to provide concrete guidelines and practical steps that can be used to facilitate improvements to the Department’s performance management processes.

Planning
In an effective organization, work is planned in advance. This includes setting performance expectations and goals for individuals to channel efforts toward achieving organizational objectives. Involving employees in the planning process is essential to their understanding of the goals of the organization and expectations, what needs to be done and why for accomplishing those goals.

Developing Performance Plans
The regulatory requirements in 5 CFR 430 for defining an employee’s performance expectations include establishing elements and standards in an employee-specific performance plan. The employee’s performance plan outlines the specific critical job elements for which the employee will be held individually accountable during the rating cycle and that must be successfully completed for the organization to satisfactorily carry out its mission and the standards against which the employee’s performance will be measured; i.e., how well the employee must perform on each element to be appraised at a specific level. Performance elements and standards should be linked to strategic organizational goals, and be results-focused, measurable, understandable, verifiable, equitable, achievable, and provide for meaningful distinctions between levels of performance. In addition, an employee performance plan should be flexible so that it can be adjusted, as necessary, to reflect changing program objectives and work requirements. When used effectively, performance plans can be beneficial working documents that support frequent progress discussions between employee and supervisor; not merely paperwork that is filed and seen only when ratings of record are required.

A technique for establishing a performance plan is to use the “SMART” approach:

Specific: Goals and expectations are specific and clearly defined.
Measurable: Outcomes are evaluated against quantifiable standards.
Attainable: Goals or results/outcomes are achievable and realistic.
Relevant: Goals are results-based and advance the operational and strategic mission objectives of the organization.
Timely: Goals are time-bound and results are measured in terms of deadlines, due dates, schedules, or cycles.
Employee Performance Plan: HHS Form 704B
A critical element is an assignment or responsibility of such importance that unsatisfactory performance in that element alone would result in a determination that the employee’s overall performance is unsatisfactory. As defined by regulation, failure on one or more critical elements can result in the employee’s reassignment, removal, or change to a lower grade. Consequently, critical elements must describe work assignments and responsibilities that are significantly influenced by an employee’s work effort and within the employee’s control.

The Department’s Employee Performance Plan template includes three categories of critical elements: (1) Customer Experience; (2) Leadership; and (3) Individual Performance Outcomes the latter of which describes organization-specific individual management and program outcomes that will contribute to the success of the OpDivs/StaffDivs and the Department’s strategic mission goals and objectives. These elements describe the work assignments and job responsibilities for which each employee is individually accountable. All three, the Customer Experience, Leadership and each of the elements in the Individual Performance Outcomes are assessed as critical performance elements. The Customer Experience Element applies to all staff and the Leadership Element only applies to Supervisors, Managers and Non-bargaining Team Leaders.

Non-supervisory employees must have a minimum of two (2), but no more than six (6) critical elements. These must include:

Customer Experience Element and at least one (1) Individual Performance Outcomes Element.

Supervisory employees must have a minimum of three (3) but no more than six (6) critical elements. These must include:

Leadership Element, Customer Experience Element and at least one (1) Individual Performance Outcomes Element.

For most employees, this means that critical elements cannot describe a group’s performance. However, a supervisor or manager can and should be held accountable for seeing that results measured at the group or team level are achieved. Critical elements assessing group performance may be appropriate to include in the performance plan for a supervisor, manager, or team leader who can reasonably be expected to command the production and resources necessary to achieve the results—that is, held individually accountable.

Supervisors and managers may use several documents and/or sources to assist them in determining the appropriate critical performance elements for their employees. These include but are not limited to:

Goals and objectives outlined in the Department’s Strategic Plan.
Specific performance goals established for a given program area as outlined in the Department’s annual performance plan.
OpDiv/StaffDiv specific program goals and objectives.
Functional area/organizational goals and objectives.
Employee Position Description.
Laws and/or regulatory requirements.
Customer/stakeholder feedback.
Employee input.
Customer Experience Element
Department policy requires an Customer Experience critical performance element. The Customer Experience critical element describes successful performance in responsibilities that are common to most supervisory and non-supervisory employees. For all staff, performance plans shall include the following customer experience performance requirements. All aspects of this critical element apply to the employee's job duties and responsibilities.

Presents advice and guidance, including providing options, recommendations, and results. Advice and guidance is complete, consistent, and provided by the established deadlines.
Establishes effective working relationships with 90% of stakeholders both internal and external to HHS as required; cooperates with co-workers and others in meeting commitments and accomplishing assigned work on time.
Routinely responds to each customer request within 24 hours of initial contact, at a minimum to confirm receipt of the request, while ensuring that the most accurate and complete information is communicated to the customer as it is available.
Other aspects described by the rating official.
Leadership Element
The critical leadership performance element applies to supervisors, managers, and non-bargaining team leaders, performance plans. Performance of supervisory/managerial duties will be carried out in accordance with regulatory requirements and other OpDiv/StaffDiv policies governing the duties and responsibilities listed below:

Ensures 90% of employee performance plans have at least one element aligned to the organization’s mission and goals and are appraised against clearly-defined and communicated performance standards to allow for a rating once a minimum performance period has been reached within the current performance cycle.
Ensures timely and regular feedback of employees’ performance on at least three occasions to include constructive suggestions for improvement, ensuring the employee understands expectations.
Addresses employee performance and conduct issues in a timely and appropriate manner with guidance from Labor and Employee Relations staff and in accordance with HHS and government-wide policies and guidelines.
Promotes high performance through use of employee development activities, balanced workload, and stretch goals; appropriately rewards high performance in accordance with HHS performance and awards policies.
Complies with EEO, Reasonable Accommodation, and Anti-Harassment policies/procedures, communicates these policies and processes to employees at least once per year, and completes all required supervisory training within the first year, with refresher training every 3 years.
Takes substantive measures to create and maintain an inclusive environment, which supports a workplace with a diversity of perspectives.
Works to remove barriers to successful employee performance, seeking resolution of workplace conflicts, and escalating issues, if appropriate.
Other aspects described by the rating official.
Individual Performance Outcomes Elements
This category identifies the key individual performance outcomes and specific end-results that are critical to the success of the Department and the OpDivs/StaffDivs. These results-oriented outcomes should be consistent with strategic planning initiatives, such as the Department’s Strategic Plan and OpDiv/StaffDiv program goals and objectives and must include one or more outcomes that are linked to the strategic mission and/or GPRA goals of the Department, OpDiv/StaffDiv, and/or the work unit. Managers should limit the number of outcomes to the most important aspects but no more than six (6) critical elements of the employee’s position.

Rating officials will determine which appropriate GPRA/mission strategic goals, outcome goals, and outcome-performance measures are best-suited to define the critical performance elements and evaluation standards for each employee’s performance plan. Performance elements should be clearly labeled on the employee’s performance plan. This cascade approach should ensure that performance plans for all employees support the organizational goals of the Department.

Each performance element should include at least one accompanying metric that is quantifiable and results-based, and each metric should contain a specific target-result to be achieved. Metrics should address significant program outcomes and improvements such as enhanced quality of service or healthcare, new knowledge and insight from research, increased productivity, and quality of service, and/or improvements in customer satisfaction.

All objectives must be achievable by the end of the rating period. If quantifiable performance results will not be available by the end of the rating period, the plan must specify how success will be measured. Data sources for all metrics must exist or must be available in time to meet the rating completion deadline. For metrics that are expressed as comparisons to past performance, for example, to increase production by ten (10) percent, baseline data must be available.

Performance Standards
The Performance Standards define the performance levels, requirements, or expectations that must be met for each element to achieve a particular level of performance. The standards must be focused on results and include credible measures at the Achieved Expected Results level, and at the Partially Achieved Expected Results level, if employee performance falls below the Achieved Expected Results level. Types of Standards to consider include the following:

Quality: Quality addresses how well the employee or work unit is expected to perform the work and the accuracy, appearance, usefulness, or effectiveness of the final product. Measures can include customer satisfaction rates determined through a customer survey/feedback.
Quantity: Quantity addresses how much work the employee or work unit is expected to produce. Measures are expressed as the expected number of completed products or services.
Timeliness: Timeliness addresses time-based deadlines within which the employee is expected to produce the work.
Cost-Effectiveness: Cost-effectiveness addresses dollar savings or cost control. Cost- effectiveness measures should address specific resource levels or constraints (money, personnel, or time) that can be documented and measured such as maintaining or reducing unit costs, reducing the time it takes to produce or provide a product or service, or reducing waste.
To develop specific measures, the rating official must determine the type or types of standards that realistically can be used to assess the outputs, outcomes, or results and progress toward goals for a given element, and then determine the measures and minimum results/outcomes/outputs that are required to achieve the specified performance level of performance. Rating officials should be careful that the Achieved Expected Results Standard allows room for errors. Allowing no room for error, referred to as an “absolute” retention standard, is permissible only when an agency can clearly defend the need for perfection; for example, when a single failure would result in loss of life, injury, breach of national security, or significant monetary loss. In addition, each standard should carefully define the outcomes or results required to achieve the specified level of performance; not backwardly describe an unacceptable performance level. An example of a backwards standard might be: “makes more than four (4) errors per document.” This would allow an employee to make one-hundred (100) errors and still be rated at the Achieved Expected Results level.

Questions that may help determine whether you are writing an absolute standard include:

How many times may the employee fail this requirement and still be performing at the Achieved Expected Results level?
Does the Standard use words such as “all”, “never”, and “each”? These words do not automatically create an absolute standard, but they often alert you to problems.
Questions that may help determine whether you are writing a backwards standard include:
Does the standard express the level of work the rating official needs to see or does it describe negative performance? For example, does it state: “requires assistance more than fifty (50) percent of the time?” A better choice is: “works independently at least fifty (50) percent of the time.”
If the employee did nothing, would he/she meet the standard, as written? For example, does it state: “completes fewer than four (4) products per year.” A better choice is: “no more than three (3) products are incomplete at the established deadline.”
The Benchmark Standards listed below are listed on the HHS Form 704B and may be used to describe required performance levels for all critical elements. Using the described benchmark standard is not mandatory. However, if the benchmark standards below are not used, standards developed by the rating official should require levels of performance that are essentially equivalent to that described by the benchmark standard at each level. When benchmark standards are used, additional specific, measurable criteria must be developed at the Achieved Expected Results level for each critical element except the Customer Experience and Leadership critical elements. While each and every criterion described in the benchmark standards will not have to be met by the employee in absolute terms to assign a particular rating level, the rating official must ensure the employee understands the overall level of performance he/she is expected to meet to be assigned a given rating level. The Customer Experience and Leadership critical elements may be applied without modification and the benchmark standards do not need any augmentation. While 5 CFR 430 requires specific, measurable criteria to be identified at the Achieved Expected Results level, rating officials are strongly encouraged to develop measurable criteria at all levels so employees fully and clearly understand their performance expectations.

Benchmark Standards
Level 5: Achieved Outstanding Results (AO): Consistently superior, significantly exceeds Level 4 (AM) performance requirements. Despite major challenges such as changing priorities, insufficient resources, unanticipated resource shortages, or externally driven parameters, employee leadership is a model of excellence. Contributions impact well beyond the employee’s level of responsibility. They demonstrate exceptional initiative in achieving results critical to Departmental success and strategic goals. Products and skills create significant changes in their area of responsibility and authority.

Indicators of performance at this level include outcomes that consistently exceed the AM level standards for critical elements described in the annual performance plan. Examples include:

Innovations, improvements, and contributions to management, administrative, technical, or other functional areas that have influence outside the work unit.
Increases office and/or individual productivity.
Improves customer, stakeholder, and/or employee satisfaction, resulting in positive evaluations, accolades, and recognition, methodology is modeled outside the organization.
Easily adapts when responding to changing priorities, unanticipated resource shortages, or other obstacles.
Initiates significant collaborations, alliances, and coalitions.
Leads workgroups or teams, such as those that design or influence improvements in program policies, processes, or other key activities.
Anticipates the need for, and identifies, professional developmental activities that prepare staff and/or oneself to meet future workforce challenges.
Consistently demonstrates the highest level of ethics, integrity, and accountability in achieving specific Departmental, OpDiv/StaffDiv, or program goals, and makes recommendations that clarify and influence improvements in ethics activities.
Level 4: Achieved More than Expected Results (AM): Consistently exceeds expectations of Level 3 (AE) performance requirements. The employee continually demonstrates successful collaborations within the work environment, overcoming significant organizational challenges such as coordination with external stakeholders or resource shortfalls. Employee works productively and strategically with others in non-routine matters, some of which may be complex and sensitive. The employee consistently demonstrates the highest level of integrity and accountability in achieving Departmental program and management goals. Employee contributions have impact beyond their immediate level of responsibility. The employee meets all critical elements, as described in the annual performance plan. Examples include:

Effectively plans, is well-organized, and completes work assignments that reflect requirements.
Decisions and actions demonstrate organizational awareness. This includes knowledge of mission, function, policies, technological systems, and culture.
Independently follows up on actions and improvements that impact the immediate work unit, establishes and maintains strong relationships with employees and/or clients, understands their priorities, balances their interests with organizational demands and requirements, effectively communicates necessary actions to them and employee/customer satisfaction is conveyed.
When serving on teams and workgroups, contributes substantively and completely according to standards identified in the plan.
Level 3: Achieved Expected Results (AE): Consistently meets performance requirements. Work is solid and dependable and customers are satisfied with program results. The employee successfully resolves operational challenges without higher-level intervention. The employee consistently demonstrates integrity and accountability in achieving Departmental program and management goals. Employee conducts follow-up actions based on performance information available to him/her. Employee seizes opportunities to improve business results and includes employee and customer perspectives. Examples include:

Acquires new skills and knowledge to meet assignment requirements.
Demonstrates ethics, integrity, and accountability to achieve Departmental goals.
Resolves operational challenges and problems without assistance from higher-level staff.
Level 2: Partially Achieved Expected Results (PA): Marginally acceptable, needs improvement, inconsistently meets Level 3 (AE) performance requirements. The employee has difficulties in meeting expectations. Actions taken by the employee are sometimes inappropriate or marginally effective. Organizational goals and objectives are met only as a result of close supervision. This is the minimum level of acceptable performance for retention on the job. Improvement is necessary.

Examples include:

Occasionally fails to meet assigned deadlines.
Work assignments occasionally require major revisions or often require minor revisions.
Does not consistently apply technical knowledge to work assignments.
Occasionally fails to adhere to required procedures, instructions, and/or formats on work assignments.
Occasionally fails to adapt to changes in priorities, procedures, or program direction.
Impacts on program performance, productivity, morale, organizational effectiveness and/or customer satisfaction need improvement.
Level 1: Achieved Unsatisfactory Results (UR): Undeniably unacceptable performance consistently does not meet Level 3 (AE) performance requirements. Repeat observations of performance indicated negative consequences in key outcomes (for example, quality, timeliness, results, customer satisfaction, etc.) as described in the annual Performance Plan. The employee fails to meet expectations. Immediate improvement is essential for job retention. Examples include:

Consistently fails to meet assigned deadlines.
Work assignments often require major revisions.
Fails to apply adequate technical knowledge to completion of work assignments.
Frequently fails to adhere to required procedures, instructions, and/or formats in completing work assignments.
Frequently fails to adapt to changes in priorities, procedures, or program direction.
Employee Participation
Supervisors and managers are strongly encouraged to involve their employees in establishing the performance plan for the employees’ positions. Participation enables employees to more clearly understand their roles and responsibilities and the level of performance that is required of them; as well as the role their positions play in the mission of the organization. However, the final decision regarding critical elements and standards always rests with the management official.

Employee participation may be accomplished in various ways, for example:

Employee and rating official jointly developing the performance plan.
Employee providing the rating official with a draft plan.
Rating official providing the employee with a draft plan.
Employee writing one of the critical elements that he/she performs in his/her position.
Once finalized, the employee is asked to sign the performance plan to acknowledge receipt of the plan and established performance expectations. If an employee declines signature, the supervisor should explain that the signature indicates receipt, not agreement. In cases where an employee refuses to sign a plan, the supervisor is authorized to implement the performance standards without employee agreement. Supervisors should annotate the employee’s refusal to sign in the employee’s signature block.

Documenting Elements and Standards
The critical elements and standards described at the Achieved Expected Results level, at a minimum, must be documented on the performance plan and signed by the rating official and the employee. In addition, an OpDiv/StaffDiv may require the reviewing official to review/approve the performance plan.

Monitoring Performance
Feedback During the Performance Cycle
Performance plans should be developed and implemented within thirty (30) calendar days of the following:

beginning of the appraisal period;
employee’s entrance on duty;
assignment of an employee to a detail or temporary promotion scheduled to exceed eighty-nine (89) calendar days; or
assignment of an employee to a new position.
Effective and timely feedback during the performance appraisal period addressing employee performance against the established performance elements and standards is an essential component of a successful performance management program. Employees need to know in a timely manner how well they are performing and if there are areas that require improvement. Feedback can come from many different sources, such as observation by managers and rating officials, measurement systems, feedback from peers, and input from customers. The rating official is responsible for determining the types, sources, and means of collecting the data and feedback that most accurately gauge performance, to ensure that each of the supervisor’s employees receives an accurate, effective, and timely rating.

When providing feedback, the following concepts are important:

Feedback works best when it relates to a specific goal, such as those established in the employee’s performance plan. Basing feedback on the employee’s performance against the elements and standards is critical to providing tangible, objective, and powerful feedback. Telling an employee that he/she is doing well because she exceeded her goal by ten (10) percent, for example, is more effective than simply saying “you're doing a good job.”
Employees should receive information about how they are doing in as timely a fashion as possible. If performance improvement is required, the sooner the employee is advised of the deficiency, the sooner he/she can take steps to correct the problem. Conversely, if a goal has been exceeded, the sooner the employee receives positive feedback, the greater the impact and sense of appreciation for the achievement.
Feedback should be provided in a manner that will best help performance. This is not to say that feedback should be exaggerated or under-stated. On the contrary, feedback should be accurate, factual, and complete to most effectively reinforce what the employee has   done well, and what the employee needs to do to improve his/her performance.
Midyear Review
An important part of the performance management process is ensuring that each employee receives at least one formal progress review during each appraisal period; approximately midway through the rating cycle. Formal ratings are not assigned for progress reviews, nor is a written narrative required unless performance is below the Achieved Expected Results level. Completion of the progress review is acknowledged on the employee’s performance plan with signatures from both the rating official and the employee. While only one progress review is required, rating officials are encouraged to frequently discuss performance with subordinate employees during the appraisal period. This is particularly critical in the case of an employee who is not performing at the Achieved Expected Results level. In this case, it may be advisable to establish regular feedback sessions with the employee.

Topics which may be discussed in a performance review include:

Communication with internal and external customers and constituents.
Training requirements and opportunities for development.
Perceptions of work (challenging, fulfilling).
Getting/giving regular, sufficient, and specific feedback.
Any further support the employee may need.
Rating officials should document employee performance, both good and when improvement is needed, throughout the year. Rating officials should provide specific examples to the employee during progress reviews, during the rating of record, and at other appropriate times throughout the year.

Developing Employees
The process of performance management provides an excellent opportunity to identify developmental needs. During planning and monitoring of work, deficiencies in performance become evident and can be addressed. Areas for improving good performance also stand out, and action can be taken to help successful employees improve even further.

Developing employees is more than just training employees. Developing employees covers all efforts to foster learning, which happens on the job every day.  When organizations focus on developing their employees' capacity to perform, rather than just training them, employees will be able to adapt to a variety of situations which is vital for the achievement of individuals and the organization.

Formal Employee Development
Employee development can be either formal or informal. Formal development may include:

Traditional training in structured courses, classrooms, and formal development programs.
Details provide valuable experience for growth and additional skill sets.
Self-study courses including those using computer-based platforms.
A means of identifying formal training for an employee is by establishing an Individual Development Plan (IDP) through an approach of: (1) Assessment; (2) Discussion; and (3) Implementation, as follows:

Assessment: The employee reviews prior job experience, training, education, and other developmental experiences to provide concrete information regarding current strengths and skills. This could include a review of past applications for employment and past training records. The employee reviews the standards for work performance to determine core competencies necessary for the job and past performance evaluations for indications of areas needing improvement and identifies core skills specific to that need. The employee assesses personal career goals and determines immediate and long-term steps toward achieving the goals. The employee identifies specific opportunities for developmental experiences and researches possible sources for development. The employee may seek out career counseling from a variety of sources including peers, current and past supervisors, and the Human Resources staff. The supervisor is available for clarification and counseling.
Discussions: To obtain mutual commitment between the supervisor and the employee, open discussion is necessary. The employee and supervisor should mutually agree to discuss the results of the assessment and the draft IDP prepared by the employee. The discussion includes perspectives on organizational needs, job requirements, the employee’s strengths and developmental needs, financial limitations, timing, and learning opportunities that the supervisor will actively support. The supervisor coaches the employee by giving open and constructive feedback, identifying challenging assignments, discussing career paths in the organization, and reasonable timeframes for meeting the objectives of the IDP. The supervisor and employee should sign a completed IDP based on mutual agreement or final decisions of the supervisor.
Implementation: The employee ensures that any necessary procurement or training request forms are prepared and monitors work that is assigned to best accomplish the IDP’s developmental experiences. The employee reports on completion of items in the IDP. The supervisor and the employee meet periodically throughout the year to review and update the IDP. OpDivs/StaffDivs may require the use of an IDP at their discretion. Supervisors and employees should check with their Human Resources Office for the IDP or other appropriate forms to be used for documenting employee development needs.
Informal Employee Development
While managers have a large influence over formal training, they have even greater impact on creating a climate for informal employee development, which can take a wide variety of forms, some of which are listed below:

Feedback is a natural part of the monitoring process of performance management, but specific and timely feedback to employees about their performance against established expectations also provides the foundation for discussing developmental needs.
Job rotations and special assignments can stretch and challenge employees and broaden their understanding of the organization.
Coaching and counseling provides individualized advice and instruction.
Mentoring helps employees clarify career goals, understand the organization, analyze strengths and developmental needs, build support networks, and deal with roadblocks.
Using the manager as an informal teacher acknowledges that managers consciously teach employees through their own model, habits, and system of values.
Learning teams can form to meet regularly to focus on improving performance.
Although informal developmental strategies cost very little, they have potentially big payoffs in terms of improved individual and team performance.

Rating Employees
Roles of the Rating Official
Rating employees means evaluating employee performance against the elements and standards in an employee's performance plan and assigning a rating of record. Rating officials should compile performance data from all appropriate sources as a part of the rating process. It also is a good idea to ask employees to track their own progress using data identified during the planning phase so they can provide a complete account of their accomplishments during progress reviews and as part of the final rating process.  The rating official, as appropriate, also should consult customers and colleagues, review the employee’s self-assessment and other relevant performance documentation (e.g., production reports), and available feedback to ensure he/she has a complete picture of the employee’s performance for the entire performance period. The assigned rating reflects the level of the employee’s performance as assessed against the standards established in the performance plan. If an employee does not have an opportunity to perform a critical element during the rating period, no rating will be assigned and the words “Not Rated” should be written on the performance plan for that element.

When assigning a rating for each critical element, the rating official should:

Carefully read each performance standard level beginning with the Achieved Expected Results standard which is considered the base-level standard.
Determine the level that best describes the employee’s performance on the element. The sum of the employee’s performance of the element must, in the Rating Official’s judgment, meet the assigned level’s criteria.
The rating official should conduct a thorough performance rating meeting with the employee that conforms to the following guidelines:
All required performance plan actions and approvals have been completed.
Schedule the meeting in a private and interruption-free location.
Conduct the session in a professional and calm demeanor, focused on performance and work- related issues.
Address each element with a discussion of noteworthy items, both positive and constructive, and an explanation of the rating based on the relevant element and standards.
Summarize the employee’s overall performance as it relates to the assigned rating of record.
Provide adequate time for the employee to give input and feedback, ask questions, and express concerns.
Have the employee sign and date the performance plan.
Sign and date the block for the rating official on the performance plan.
Narrative Summaries
A narrative is required when an employee’s performance is at the “Achieved Unsatisfactory Results (UR)” or “Achieved Outstanding Results (AO)” level. The narrative should contain examples of the employee’s performance which substantiate how the employee’s performance falls within the levels assigned. Narratives are recorded on the performance plan. A narrative is not required for the “Achieved More Than Expected Results (AM)”, “Achieved Expected Results (AE)”, or the “Partially Achieved Expected Results (PA)” levels but may be written if the Rating Official desires to provide this level of feedback to the employee.

Disagreement with Rating
Recognizing that there may be differences of opinion between employees and Rating Officials on performance assessments and ratings, employees may respond to performance ratings and request reconsideration. Employee comments become a part of the official appraisal rating of record.

Reconsideration actions may include:

Employees who desire to add such written comments shall have seven (7) calendar days from the date of the issuance of the appraisal.
Employee comments must be reviewed by the Rating and Reviewing Officials to determine whether these comments warrant any changes in the element or summary ratings to be submitted for the record.
Reviewing Officials may elect to change the rating of record. This amended rating will be entered into the performance plan and signed by the Reviewing Official and the employee.
Employees being reduced in grade or removed based on performance have the right to appeal to the Merit Systems Protection Board; or if an employee believes he or she was discriminated against based on any of the protected classes or actions, an EEO complaint may be filed.
Please be aware that the written comment requirements may be modified by the specific Collective Bargaining Agreements negotiated for your OpDiv/StaffDiv, so it is critical that you consult your designated LER representative to ensure appropriate formal compliance requirements are met.

Rewarding Performance
A basic principle of effective management is that performance is influenced by positive and negative consequences. Positive consequences include rewards and recognition, promotions, Within-Grade Increases (WGI), etc. Negative consequences may include counseling, reassigning, removing, or downgrading the employee.

Performance Award Eligibility
Performance awards are an integral part of the performance appraisal process. As such, they are linked to the rating of record and submitted and considered for approval only at the conclusion of the rating period.

Employees whose summary rating is Achieved Outstanding Results may be eligible to receive a performance award payment of up to five (5) percent of salary, including locality payment or special rate supplement. This award is based on the salary as of the last day of the rating period (December 31).

Only employees who receive an Achieved Outstanding Results rating may be eligible for a Quality Step Increase (QSI). Employees who are rated at the Achieved More than Expected Results, Achieved Expected Results, Partially Achieved Expected Results, or Achieved Unsatisfactory Results may not be considered for a QSI. Only General Schedule (GS) employees are eligible to receive a QSI. QSIs must be awarded based on an Achieved Outstanding Results rating for the previous rating cycle and not for midyear performance accomplishments. In addition, an employee may not receive a QSI and a cash award or time-off award for the same performance and a QSI may not be granted to an employee who has received a QSI within the preceding fifty-two (52) consecutive calendar weeks. QSIs are not automatic and may be awarded at management’s discretion and subject to funds availability.

Employees whose performance is Achieved More than Expected Results may be eligible for a performance award of up to four (4) percent of salary. Employees whose performance is Achieved Expected Results may be eligible for a performance award of up to three (3) percent of salary. The locality payment or special rate supplement, apply to both the Achieved More than Expected Results and Achieved Expected Results performance ratings. All awards are at the discretion of management and subject to funds availability. According to OPM, no employee is entitled to an award.

Employees who receive Partially Achieved Expected Results or Achieved Unsatisfactory Results ratings are not eligible for performance rating-based awards.

OpDivs/StaffDivs may also recognize employees for short-term accomplishments using other award types, such as Special Act/Special Service awards and Time-Off awards, as appropriate. Refer to the awards section of this handbook.

Addressing Poor Performance
At any time in the performance appraisal cycle that an employee’s performance is not meeting performance expectations, the supervisor must take prompt and appropriate actions to improve the performance. The supervisor will provide feedback to inform the employee regarding falling below the Achieved Expected Results (AE) level prior to contacting Labor and Employee Relations (LER) or any other management official. After meeting with the employee, the supervisor may contact the LER office for advice and assistance. The LER office is available to provide guidance to rating officials for documenting performance, providing feedback to the employee, and assessing additional appropriate courses of action.

Partially Achieved Expected Results Level
An employee who is performing at the Partially Achieved Expected Results level cannot be granted a WGI or a non-competitive promotion to a higher grade in a career ladder. Even if a WGI is not due, when an employee is performing at the Partially Achieved Expected Results level, the supervisor must advise the employee of his/her specific performance deficiencies and take appropriate steps to assist the employee in correcting those deficiencies. An official Opportunity to Demonstrate Acceptable Performance (ODAP) is not required to deal with Partially Achieved Expected Results performance. It is used to deal with performance at the Achieved Unsatisfactory Results level, as described below.

Achieved Unsatisfactory Results Level
If performance on any critical element is determined to be at the Achieved Unsatisfactory Results level at any time during the rating period, the supervisor will provide assistance to help the employee improve performance to the minimally acceptable level of Partially Achieved Expected Results, or better. The supervisor must, at a minimum, give written notice to the employee of his/her failure to demonstrate acceptable performance and provide the employee an opportunity to demonstrate acceptable performance under an ODAP. The written notification must include:

The specific elements on which the employee’s performance is determined to be Achieved Unsatisfactory Results, including specific examples of how the employee’s performance is unsatisfactory.
The performance requirements that must be met.
The specific assistance that will be provided and the meeting schedule for feedback, assistance, and coaching that will be established to help the employee improve performance.
The specific period of time the employee will be given to demonstrate acceptable performance.
Notification that actions may be initiated to reassign, reduce in grade, or remove the employee if performance does not improve to at least the Partially Achieved Expected Results level.
The employee must be given a reasonable period of time in which to demonstrate a Partially Achieved Expected Results level of performance. The length of this reasonable opportunity period is not dictated by regulation nor Departmental guidance. The reasonable period of time to improve will be determined by management and may vary based on the requirements of the individual position and the amount of time and effort previously devoted to correcting the employee’s performance deficiencies. As a general rule, less time and effort are required in cases where the rating official has properly and promptly managed performance and documented his/her efforts to resolve performance problems. For bargaining unit employees, additional Collective Bargaining Agreement requirements may apply. An employee who fails to improve under an ODAP may be removed from federal service.

Supervisors must promptly contact and consult with the LER office for assistance in dealing with unacceptable performance and/or employee misconduct concerns.

Unsatisfactory Performance Vs. Misconduct
It is important to note the distinction between performance at the Achieved Unsatisfactory Results level and employee misconduct. Sometimes, misconduct can result in poor performance. Sometimes performance and misconduct can be inter-related. However, it is important to recognize the difference between the two and to take prompt and appropriate actions accordingly.

Performance at the Achieved Unsatisfactory Results level is failure of the employee to perform the job at the required minimum retention level of Partially Achieved Expected Results. Misconduct is failure to follow a workplace rule, code, or behavior, whether written or unwritten. Examples of misconduct include tardiness, absenteeism, unprofessional or discourteous conduct, damaging or destroying government property, or falsification. A misconduct problem also may exist when an employee is capable of performing his/her duties at the Partially Achieved Expected Results level, or higher, but chooses not to. Poor performance and/or misconduct can result in disciplinary action, including removal.

Supervisor’s Checklist for Appraisals
Meeting with Employees
Giving and receiving feedback is one of the critical components of the performance appraisal process. As a rating official, you should ensure that the feedback you provide is meaningful, that you take the time to prepare, and that the employee has a chance to ask questions and provide input.

Meeting with your employees to discuss how they are doing can and should be very beneficial for both of you, enabling you both to understand each other better. The more you know one another, the greater the likelihood you will be able to effectively communicate on an ongoing basis, particularly should a problem arise.

While you are encouraged to provide feedback to your employees on an on-going basis, Department policy requires that you meet formally with employees at least once approximately midway through the performance appraisal cycle, and once at the end of the rating year. These meetings are a chance for you to engage in an open exchange with your employees about their performance.

Please be aware that these mandatory meeting requirements may be modified by the specific Collective Bargaining Agreements negotiated for your OpDiv/StaffDiv, so it is critical that you consult your designated LER representative to ensure appropriate formal compliance requirements are met.

The following are examples of the subjects that are appropriate for one-on-one progress and professional development meetings with each of your employees:

Organizational expectations, individual performance standards, and specific feedback on the work the employee did well and/or areas that need improvement.
Information about the “big picture” and how the employee’s role, responsibilities, and achievements contribute to mission/organizational goals.
Feedback from the employee about how he/she feels about his/her job, whether he/she enjoys the work and is ready for greater responsibilities, concerns about current work assignments, and requests for guidance or assistance from you or co-workers.
Professional development plans and opportunities; i.e., your employee’s career goals. These meetings can be as simple as discussing training opportunities to better handle a specific project or as broad as the employee’s long-term professional aspirations and plans (e.g., individual development plan).
Conducting Midyear Reviews
Prior to the midyear progress review, supervisors should prepare by considering the following:

Request information from the employee on his/her key work accomplishments for the period being discussed. Keep a “kudos” folder for each employee with key accomplishments that you can refer to.
If you have specific issues that you want to discuss with the employee, ensure that you are prepared to discuss the specifics of the concerns, clearly and concisely.
Think about and document what is most important regarding achievements and concerns for you to share with the employee about his/her progress and overall performance.
Write down what you feel the employee has done/accomplished/learned, what he/she did particularly well, and any areas in which you feel the employee needs to improve, including what they could have done better. You should include examples of specific projects or assignments.
Think about whether the employee has the skills you think he/she needs to do his/her job well and write down any skills you think need to be gained or improved.
Write down the key points and questions you want to discuss during the meeting.
Conducting End-of-Year Reviews
During the end-of-year review discussion, review the employee’s performance during the current performance period. Summarize key accomplishments, praise the employee for work that was completed particularly well, advise the employee of work that could have been improved and/or areas where he/she may need to focus more effort, etc. Offer examples and provide the employee an opportunity to ask clarifying questions and provide additional information. This should be a two-way dialogue, not a lecture.

In addition:

Ask the employee for feedback about the past year and for other information that you both can use in working more effectively together in the future. For example, did the employee feel appropriately supported; was the feedback the employee received, sufficient, useful, and timely; and is the employee adequately trained and does he/she have the resources needed to carry out his/her work.
Ask the employee about his/her immediate and/or long-term career goals and offer suggestions or resources to assist him/her with these goals, as appropriate.
Clearly articulate your expectations for the coming year and confirm with the employee that he/she understands the expectations. Be prepared to clarify any areas of confusion.
Once the review discussion is completed, both the manager and the employee sign the appraisal form and the employee is provided with a copy of the completed appraisal.

Employee’s Checklist for Appraisals
Meeting with your supervisor for a midyear review to discuss how you are doing can be very beneficial. Meeting with your supervisor to discuss your performance is beneficial for both of you, enabling you both to understand each other better. The more you know one another, the greater the likelihood you will be able to effectively communicate on an ongoing basis, particularly should a problem arise. Examples of these benefits are listed below.

Advantages of a Midyear Review to the Employee
The opportunity to obtain information directly from your supervisor about your performance expectations and standards and to clarify, if there are questions, what is required to accomplish noteworthy results.
Direct performance feedback.
Discussing the “big picture” about how you are doing overall and how the work you do helps accomplish important goals of the organization.
The opportunity to provide feedback to your supervisor about your work experience; for example, do you enjoy the work you do, are you ready for greater responsibilities (and how), are there concerns about current work assignments, or do you need more guidance and assistance from your supervisor or your co-workers.
Professional development plans and opportunities; i.e., your career goals. Career discussions can be as simple as discussing your interest in a training course to better handle a specific project, to something as broad as your career aspirations and how you plan to get there.
Employee Preparation for the Midyear Review
Although your supervisor may schedule your midyear review meeting, you are a critical participant in the discussion. In fact, you can and should identify your goals for the midyear review; for example, suggestions for providing better customer service or specific feedback or coaching on a particular skill area. In preparation for your midyear review, consider the following:

Prepare a list of key work accomplishments. Providing this list to your supervisor will ensure that your significant accomplishments are not overlooked. In addition, you are prepared to ask your supervisor for feedback on specific projects or assignments.
If you have specific issues to discuss with your supervisor, give him/her a “heads up” so that he/she can also be well-prepared for your discussion. Be prepared to discuss each issue specifically, clearly, and concisely.
What is most important for you to learn and/or find out about how you are doing?  What did you do particularly well? What are the ways you may have been disappointed or challenged in how you performed?
What feedback would you like to offer your supervisor? Be specific. For example: “I really like it when you review and edit my drafts before they are put in final form, so that we do not waste time revising documents at the last minute; or, “I really need to hear from you periodically about how I am doing when I am working on a project, rather than assuming your silence means I am doing fine.”
Where do you see your career heading? Do you have the skills you feel you need to do your job well? What skills might you want to work on better developing? How can your supervisor help you achieve your career goals?
Employee Preparation for the End-of-Year Review
Your end-of-year rating feedback discussion also can benefit you. To make the most out of this discussion, prepare and submit to your supervisor, in advance, a written self- assessment of your contributions, opportunities, and professional development.  In addition, prepare written notes of key or important points you wish to discuss. Your self- assessment should address the following areas:
Your specific major accomplishments, aligned to your performance plan.
The factors that contributed to your success throughout the year.
How well you met your day-to-day responsibilities; for example:
How your work impacted the work unit, team members, customers, and the Department.
The quality of your work and how it made things better.
The responsibilities that were added or removed from your duties during the review period, if any, and why these were added or removed.
Your participation in, and achievements from, team or group activities.
Any performance concerns, for example:
The initiatives you wanted to complete this year but were unable and why.
The obstacles that hindered you from accomplishing your work, if any.
The additional support or direction you feel you need in specific areas.
Professional development achievements. For example:
The training programs or professional development activities you completed.
The ways in which you were able to apply this training and development to your work.
The responsibilities that require you to learn new or additional skills.
Employee Discussion During the End-of-Year Review
Engage in a two-way discussion. Describe to your supervisor how the year went for you, the ways you felt supported, where you might have benefited from additional feedback, or other information that you can both use to work more effectively together in the coming year.
Discuss your specific program plans and goals for the upcoming performance year.
Share your short-range and long-range goals and describe what resources or support you need to achieve these plans. Discuss with your supervisor available training resources or materials that will help you execute your work.
As necessary, ask your supervisor to clarify your performance expectations for the upcoming performance year.
Developing the Individual Development Plan (IDP)
The IDP is a valuable performance enhancement tool for any federal employee. The IDP can be of great assistance to those who want to enhance skills and strengths and learn more about matters of interest that are relevant to the performance of the Department. OpDivs/StaffDivs may require the use of an IDP at their discretion. Contact the HHS University for the IDP or other appropriate forms for documenting employee-development needs.

Goals of the IDP
The employee and the rating official develop IDP goals together. The IDP provides a connection between the employee’s career interests and needs to the organizational mission and priorities. The most common goals of an IDP are to:

Learn new skills to improve current job performance.
Maximize current performance in support of organizational requirements.
Increase interest, challenge, and satisfaction in current position.
Obtain knowledge, skills, and abilities necessary for career growth.
An IDP identifies a broad spectrum of developmental opportunities for the employee, including on- the-job training, distance learning, formal classroom training, details, shadow assignments and self- development. It addresses the needs of the organization and of the employee beginning with a focus on maximizing employee performance in the current job.

An IDP is a guide to help individuals reach career goals within the context of organizational objectives. It is a developmental action plan to move employees from their current place to where they want to go. It provides the systematic steps to improve and to build on strengths as individuals improve job performance and pursue career goals.

An IDP is a partnership between the employee and the rating official for employee development. Preparing an IDP involves open feedback, clarification, and discussion about developmental needs, goals, and plans. Periodic communication between the rating official and the employee is the key to the success of an IDP.

An IDP is not a:

Performance appraisal. It is not used to determine pay, awards, or other personnel actions based on performance.
Contract for training. Final approval of training opportunities is made based on factors such as timing and budget availability.
Position Description. It is not used for clarifying discrepancies in the duties as described.
Guarantee for promotion or for reassignment to another position. While the developmental experiences identified in an IDP may have some training that might qualify the employee for another position or grade, there is no guarantee of advancement.
One means to establish an IDP is by using the following Assessment, Discussion, and Implementation approach:

Assessment: The employee reviews prior job experience, training, education, and other developmental experiences to provide concrete information regarding current strengths and skills. This could include a review of past applications for employment and past training records. The employee reviews the established performance standards to determine core competencies, skills, and learning opportunities necessary for the job.  The employee assesses personal career goals, within the context of established performance requirements and organizational needs, and constructs both an immediate and a longer-term plan to achieve his/her learning goals. The employee may seek guidance from peers, current and past supervisors, or HHS University. The supervisor should ensure the employee knows that he/she is available for assistance and support.
Discussion: The employee and supervisor should mutually agree to discuss the results of the assessment and reach consensus on the draft IDP prepared by the employee. The discussion should review and assess the plan within the context of organizational needs, the employee’s current and prospective job requirements, the employee’s strengths and developmental needs, financial limitations, timing, and learning opportunities that the supervisor is able to actively support.  The supervisor coaches the employee by providing candid and constructive feedback, identifying challenging assignments, discussing potential career paths in the organization, and reasonable timeframes for meeting the objectives of the IDP. The supervisor and employee should sign a completed IDP.
Implementation: The supervisor ensures that any necessary procurement or training request forms are prepared and monitors work that is assigned to best accomplish the IDP’s developmental objectives. The employee reports on completion of items in the IDP. The supervisor and the employee meet periodically throughout the year to review and update the IDP.
As in all aspects of the employee/supervisor relationship, direct and open communications are the keys to a successful IDP. The following describe the respective responsibilities of the employee and supervisor in the IDP process:

Employee’s Responsibilities for an IDP
Assessing the level of personal skills necessary to successfully perform the current position. Working with the supervisor to identify skill gaps.
Suggesting developmental experiences that would enhance the skills required to effectively perform the employee’s current position and desired career goals.
Identifying personal career goals.
Understanding the skills necessary to meet the desired career goals.
Participating in open discussions with the rating official concerning the elements of the IDP.
Completing the developmental experiences in the IDP approved by the rating official.
Alerting the rating official when the IDP needs review and updating.
Rating Official’s Responsibilities for an IDP
Providing constructive feedback to the employee about the skills necessary for performing the current position.
Suggesting and reviewing employee suggestions for developmental experiences that would enhance the skills required to successfully perform the employee’s current and career goal positions.
Counseling the employee about career goals.
Participating in open discussions with the employee concerning the development and periodic updates and reviews of the IDP.
Approving specific developmental experiences.
Monitoring the progress of the employee toward completion of the developmental experiences agreed upon in the IDP.
Questions and Answers
Awards In General
What types of awards can federal employees receive?

Government-wide regulations specify four types of awards that can be given to federal employees: cash awards, including QSIs; honorary awards; informal recognition awards; and Time-Off awards.

Can an employee receive two types of award for the same accomplishment or contribution?

Yes. Departments may use any combination of award types to reward a specific contribution. For example, an employee might receive both a certificate (informal recognition) and a cash award as recognition for a single contribution. However, the overall combined value of the awards should not exceed the value to the organization of the contribution recognized. Thus, the award should be commensurate with the contribution of the employee.

Does a department have to involve its employees in developing appraisal programs, award programs, and employee performance plans?

Departments are encouraged to involve employees in the design and implementation of their appraisal programs, award programs, and employee performance plans. Of course, where a Union has been granted exclusive representation rights, the elected Union representatives represent the bargaining-unit employees in such activities.

Are there limits to the amount of an award a department may approve under its own authority?

Yes. OPM must approve any cash award greater than $10,000 but less than $25,000. Awards greater than $25,000 must be submitted through OPM for the President's approval. The Department of Defense and the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) may approve awards up to $25,000. SES performance awards and Presidential-rank awards for SES and SL/ST employees have award- specific requirements.

Can an award program cover contract employees?

No. Contract employees may not receive direct payments from the federal government. Their employment, including pay, rewards, and discipline, must be handled by their employer, the contractor, not the federal government.

Performance-Based Awards
What is a performance-based cash award?

A performance-based cash award, also commonly known as a rating-based award, is a cash payment and requires the most recent rating of record as the justification for the award. Rating-based cash awards must be based on a rating of record at the Achieved Expected Results level or higher and rating-based awards programs must make meaningful distinctions based on levels of performance.

Can an employee receiving a Partially Achieved Expected Results rating or an Achieved Unsatisfactory Results rating of record receive a rating-based cash award?

No. An employee must have an Achieved Expected Results rating of record, or higher, to be eligible to receive a rating-based cash award.

Can an employee receive both a rating-based award and an award for a specific contribution (Special Act) in the same year?

Yes. An employee may receive both an award based on a rating of record and an award based on a specific contribution in a single year. The most important factor in deciding whether to grant multiple awards is that the total value of the awards must be commensurate with the value to the department of the recognized accomplishment. In addition, agencies must ensure they comply with all applicable requirements, including OPM approval of awards over $10,000.

Are agencies required to keep award recipient information private?

It depends on the type of award granted. For the most part, compensation-related information in the federal government is a matter of public record or publicly releasable under the Freedom of Information Act. Generally, this includes award payments except for rating-based awards.

Departments may not disclose award amounts if doing so could reveal the recipient's rating of record, which is protected information under the Privacy Act. For information on specific situations, contact the Office of General Counsel.

Can an employee receive a rating-based cash award if he/she does not have a rating of record?

No. Rating-based cash awards are based on the rating of record, which is the written justification for the award.

Are rating-based performance awards subject to the $10,000 and $25,000 approval thresholds?

Yes. Under statute and the implementing regulations, such awards are subject to the OPM and Presidential approval, respectively. The two exceptions are the Department of Defense and the Internal Revenue Service who are authorized to grant awards up to $25,000 without OPM/Presidential approval.

Time-Off Awards
Can a manager offer an employee the choice between a Time-off award and another type of award?

OPM strongly discourages this. Giving employees the choice between different types of awards could have tax consequences.

Can a Time-off award be transferred if the employee leaves one department and accepts a position with another department?

If an employee transfers from one department to another, the gaining department is not obligated to honor the Time-off award. Therefore, any unused Time-off awards are not transferable, unless a special arrangement is made with the receiving department to honor the Time-off award granted by the employee's former department. Also, the losing department may not convert the Time-off to cash and give that cash to the employee.

Why does OPM prohibit converting Time-off awards to cash?

The "currency" of a Time-off award is time, not money. Departments have the authority to grant cash awards when they feel that is the appropriate form of recognition or incentive.

Can a manager substitute Time-off awards for compensatory time?

No. The circumstances appropriate for the use of compensatory time are not generally appropriate for a Time-off award. Compensatory time is authorized in exchange for hours worked in excess of the employee's regular work schedule. Awarding time off instead of compensatory time violates the incentive awards concept of recognizing exceptional performance, as opposed to compensating for extended work schedules.

The Performance Appraisal
What's the difference between an appraisal system and an appraisal program?

An appraisal system describes the general policies and parameters for the administration of performance appraisal programs in the department. An appraisal program is the specific procedures, methods, and requirements for planning, monitoring, and rating performance. Programs have to be designed within the boundaries of the system but can be tailored to the needs of the organization.

How long does my supervisor have to be in his/her position before he/she can rate me?

Government-wide regulations do not specify a minimum amount of time a supervisor must be on the job before he/she may rate an employee. Any department’s performance appraisal programs may require a minimum amount of time the supervisor must be on the job before rating an employee. The Department places no minimum time required in a position before a supervisor can rate an employee.

Can a program include more than one pattern of summary levels for ratings of record?

No. Each program must use a single pattern of summary levels. To use different summary patterns, departments must define separate programs and employee coverage to which a single pattern applies. However, more than one program can use the same summary pattern.

Who has the authority to assign a rating of record to an employee?

Government-wide performance management regulations do not specifically designate who has the authority to assign a rating of record. The department will determine who has this authority.

Generally, the Department devolves this duty to the rating official, or if he/she is unavailable, to the reviewing official.

Can a department develop more than one appraisal program?

Yes. A department can authorize the development of separate appraisal programs under the framework of their appraisal system. This allows departmental sub-components or sub-populations to determine how best to address their needs and cultures and more effectively manage individual and organizational performance by tailoring specific appraisal procedures and requirements to mission and work technology.

Can a rating of record ever be given at a time other than the end of the appraisal period?

Yes. Government-wide regulations define a rating of record as the performance rating completed at the end of the appraisal period that reflects performance over the entire period, or an off-cycle rating of record given when a WGI decision must be prepared. These are the only times that a rating of record can be issued.

Does an employee have to have a performance rating or a rating of record of Achieved Unsatisfactory Results before a performance-based action can be taken?

No. Both a performance rating and a rating of record involve the evaluation of an employee's performance against all the elements and standards in the performance plan. At any time during the appraisal period, a department can make the determination that an employee's performance is unacceptable on one or more critical elements. This determination is sufficient to begin the process that could lead to a performance-based action, including termination, if the employee's performance fails to improve to an acceptable level.

Does OPM have to review and approve all of a department’s appraisal programs?

OPM must review and approve a department’s appraisal system which sets out the limits within which all the department’s programs must be developed. OPM must approve the appraisal system before any appraisal program developed under the system can be implemented.

What is the difference between the minimum period and the appraisal period?

The minimum period is the shortest length of time established by a department that an employee must perform under assigned elements and standards before a performance rating can be prepared. The appraisal period is the length of time designated by a department (usually one year) that is the basis for the rating of record.

What happens to a performance-based action if a department changes its appraisal program while the action is still in progress?

If a notice of proposed action has been given to the employee, a change to an appraisal program should have no effect on the action. Regulations contain a specific provision, called the "savings provision," that safeguards administrative procedures pending under a previously approved appraisal program, from being disrupted by the implementation of new programs covered by these regulations. OPM's system approval procedures require department appraisal programs to have a similar provision to safeguard pending administrative procedures when programs change.

Does a department have to involve its employees in developing appraisal programs, award programs, and employee performance plans?

All departments are strongly encouraged to involve employees in the design and implementation of their appraisal programs, award programs, and employee performance plans. Of course, where a Union has been granted exclusive recognition, such involvement for bargaining-unit employees must be through their elected Union representatives.

How should a department transition between appraisal programs?

Ideally, a department would close out the current appraisal period and issue ratings of record at the time specified under the existing appraisal program and then begin the next appraisal period under the terms of the new program.

Should there be performance management training for rating officials?

Yes. OPM regulations require departments to train rating officials on performance management topics including developing performance plans, providing feedback, appraising and rewarding performance, and taking timely and appropriate actions on resolving poor performance.

Can a department exclude temporary employees from its performance appraisal system?

Yes. Provided the temporary employees meet the government-wide requirements. A department may exclude an employee who is serving in a position under a temporary position for less than one year, agrees to serve without a performance evaluation, and will not be considered for a reappointment or for an increase in pay based in whole or in part on performance.

If a department is in the middle of the appraisal period and decides to change the number of summary levels used in its appraisal program, is it required to end the current period and give employees a rating of record?

No. Regulations do not require that the appraisal period be ended to change appraisal programs. However, departments need to remember that the regulations permit only a single rating of record in a given appraisal period.

Can a department assume that most employees are performing at an acceptable level, for example, and rate by exception?

No. The statute requires that each employee be appraised against his/her performance plan. It does not allow for appraising an employee by presuming that an employee is meeting performance standards. For the same reason, the process for appraising employees described by the regulations does not provide for any assumed levels of performance.

What is the maximum length allowable for appraisal periods?

The regulations specify that appraisal periods shall generally be designated so that employees are provided a rating of record annually.

May a department establish exceptions to coverage of employees under a performance appraisal system?

Yes, as long as the employees excluded by a department are covered by another performance appraisal system, unless the employees are in the excepted service and the department has obtained separate OPM approval for their exclusion.

Labor Relations
Is there a minimum amount of time an employee must be under the direction of a supervisor before that supervisor can rate that employee?

Government-wide regulations do not establish a minimum time that an employee must be under a supervisor before he/she can be rated. Instead, the regulations require that appraisal programs establish a minimum appraisal period (a minimum amount of time that employees must work under a specific set of elements and standards) before they can be assigned a rating of record. As long as a supervisor has the necessary information and the employee has been under an established set of elements and standards for the minimum appraisal period, the supervisor can assign a rating.

Will an employee's rating of record change if he or she moves to another department or organization that uses a different summary rating pattern?

No. A rating of record does not change when an employee moves to another department or organization, whether or not they use a different summary pattern. However, an employee will not know how many years of additional service credit will be given for a specific rating of record until a department is getting ready to run a Reduction In Force.

May a department grant additional service credit for Reduction In Force based on employees receiving a QSI?

No. The only basis for granting additional service credit for Reduction In Force is a rating of record.

Must a department use performance in the Reduction In Force process?

Yes, under current law, performance ratings must be a factor in the Reduction In Force process. Only under a demonstration project that waives pertinent law or regulation could a department drop the use of performance in a Reduction In Force.

Can ratings given by private industry employers be used as equivalent ratings of record for crediting performance in a Reduction In Force?

No. Only ratings given by federal government entities can be used and only when they meet the requirements for equivalent ratings of record as specified in the performance management regulations.

Quality Step Increase (QSI)
Who can get a QSI?

A QSI is a pay feature of the General Schedule. QSIs shall only be awarded based on an employee receiving an Achieved Outstanding Results summary rating for the previous rating cycle, and not for midyear performance accomplishments. Further, a QSI may not be granted to an employee who has received a QSI within the preceding fifty (52) consecutive calendar weeks. QSIs are not automatic and are awarded at management’s discretion.

Is a written justification required to grant a QSI?

OPM strongly encourages departments to require some form of recorded justification, assuring compliance with department-established criteria for QSI eligibility. This enables a department to show that the proposed recipient has performed at a truly exceptional level to justify a permanent increase in his/her rate of basic pay.

Performance Plans
What is a critical performance element?

A critical element is a work assignment or responsibility of such importance that unacceptable performance on that element would result in a determination that the employee's overall performance is unacceptable.

What is a retention performance standard?

A retention performance standard describes the level of performance necessary to retain a position. It is the standard written for performance one level above the Achieved Unacceptable Results level. In appraisal programs where a Partially Achieved Expected Results Level exists for appraising elements, the standard for job retention is the Partially Achieved Expected Results Level.

Could someone who has responsibility for a group of employees (supervisor, manager, team leader) have a critical performance element based on a result that the group is expected to achieve?

Yes. OPM believes it is possible to develop a critical performance element and standard that holds a supervisor, manager, or team leader responsible for group performance. The element and standard would have to be crafted carefully so that it identifies measurable achievements that would be expected to result when the individual supervisor, manager, or team leader properly exercises his/her leadership responsibilities.

Should rating officials be held accountable for making meaningful distinctions in performance?

Yes. OPM encourages departments to hold supervisors accountable for fulfilling their performance management responsibilities. Departments often establish elements and standards in the performance plans of rating officials to hold them accountable for the performance management of their subordinates.

Must a department have written performance plans for its employees?

The regulations state "written, or otherwise recorded." This language was chosen very deliberately to allow for use of electronic formats. Although departments do not have to write performance plans on paper, the plans must be recorded in some way and departments must be able to produce a paper copy, if needed. Purely oral plans do not meet the regulatory requirement.

How will an employee's performance plan be different if he/she teleworks?

There is no difference between managing the performance of a teleworker and managing the employee who works in the office. Performance is grounded in what one accomplishes, not necessarily where one carries out his/her duties and responsibilities.

Are the performance rating, the rating of record, and the summary level the same thing?

No, but they are similar. A performance rating is the appraisal of the employee's performance compared to the elements and standards established in the performance plan. The rating of record is a specific performance rating done at the end of the appraisal period that includes the appraisal of the elements and standards and also must include the assignment of a summary level (Levels 1 through 5).  A summary level is an ordered category of performance from Level 1 through Level 5, with Level 1 as the lowest and Level 5 as the highest. Performance ratings assigned at times other than the end of the appraisal period, such as at the midyear review, do not require a summary level to be assigned, although one is permitted.

Can employees on approved annual or sick leave be held to a work performance standard in their performance appraisal?

A department may not hold an employee accountable for work that does not get done because of an absence for which the employee is on any type of approved leave. If there is a specific performance standard for the appraisal year, it may be pro-rated for the amount of time the employee was at work.

Must the rating of record be derived and the summary level assigned only on the basis of an appraisal of elements and standards in the employee's performance plan?

Yes. Statute requires that employees be evaluated against their performance elements and standards.

Why does OPM require higher-level management review of a Level 1 (Achieved Unsatisfactory Results) rating of record?

An Achieved Unsatisfactory Results level rating of record bars granting Step Increases, may result in a performance-based adverse action, and removes retention rights in a Reduction In Force. For these reasons, there must be an extra measure of assurance that a Level 1 rating of record has been properly assigned. The requirement for higher-level review of a rating of record that could have significant consequences for the employee, including removal, is a prudent measure of protection for the employee.

Can veterans on leave seeking treatment for a service-related disability be held to a work performance standard in their performance plan?

Performance management regulations specifically address veterans seeking medical treatment. A department may not lower the rating of record or performance rating of a disabled veteran seeking medical treatment.

Can individual critical elements be written to appraise the individual's contribution to a team?

Yes. The individual critical element must describe performance that is reasonably measured and controlled at the individual employee's level. Such performance includes individual contributions to the team, but does not include team performance.

Can a department use critical elements that address team performance?

The law intends critical elements to be used to establish individual accountability. This restriction is clearest for non-supervisory employees who may be serving as team members. Consequently, critical elements generally are not appropriate for identifying and measuring team performance, which by its definition involves shared accountability. A supervisor or manager can and should be held accountable for seeing that results measured at the group or team level are achieved. Critical elements assessing group performance may be appropriate to include in the performance plan of a supervisor, manager, or team leader who can reasonably be expected to command the resources and authority necessary to achieve the results.

Guide for Non-standard Situations
Performance Actions for Non-Standard Situations
Situation	Performance Plan	Action To Be Taken
For whatever reason, employee did not have a plan at any time during the entire appraisal period, or did not perform under a plan for ninety (90) calendar days, such as an employee returning from long-term training.	Establish plan immediately.	If there are more than ninety (90) days left in the appraisal period, establish a plan. If there are less than ninety (90) calendar days, the employee will not receive a plan nor rating for that cycle. A plan may be extended (45) calendar days at the end of the appraisal (December 31) cycle to meet the 90 day minimum to provide a rating.
Employee moves from one position A to another position B within ninety (90) calendar days of end of appraisal period.	Establish plan for new position under option (2).	(1) If employee was in position A for at least ninety (90) calendar days, rate employee prior to the position change. This rating will become the final rating of record for the appraisal period. (2) If employee was not in position A for at least ninety (90) calendar days, or was not under a plan for ninety (90) calendar days in position A, the employee will not be rated on position A. If there are ninety (90) calendar days remaining in the appraisal period in position B, create a plan for position B and rate the employee at the end of the appraisal cycle.
Within ninety (90) days of the end of the appraisal period, employee is hired from outside the federal government.	Wait until the beginning of the next appraisal cycle to establish plan.	If less than ninety (90) calendar days remain in the appraisal period, the employee will not receive a rating until the next cycle.
Employee changes positions within the Department during the appraisal period.	Establish plan for new position.	If the plan has been in effect for at least ninety (90) calendar days at the time of each position change, rate the employee. The rating of record for the appraisal period must consider all ratings made during the entire appraisal period. If there are more than ninety (90) days left in the appraisal period, establish a plan. If there are less than ninety (90) calendar days, the employee will not receive a plan nor rating for that cycle.
Employee is detailed or temporarily assigned to another position in the Department, and the time in that position is expected to be at least 90 days by the end of the appraisal period.	Establish plan for detailed position or new position.	If a plan had been in place for at least ninety (90) calendar days, rate at time of position change. Also rate at end of temporary assignment (or detail) if it lasted at least ninety (90) calendar days. Consider all ratings made during the appraisal period in preparing the annual summary rating.
Employee is detailed or assigned outside the Department and the time in the outside organization is expected to be at least ninety (90) calendar days.	Make a reasonable effort to see that a plan is given to the employee while at the outside entity.	If a plan had been in effect for at least ninety (90) calendar days, rate at time of position change. Also, the rating official will make a reasonable effort to obtain performance information from that outside assignment, especially if employee was not on a Departmental plan for at least ninety (90) calendar days during the appraisal period. At a minimum, the rating official will request a memorandum describing the assignments performed by the employee and an assessment of how well the employee performed the assignments. The rating official will consider all ratings made during the appraisal period in preparing the rating of record.
Before the end of the appraisal period, the employee goes on long-term training and does not return by the end of the appraisal period.	N/A.	If a plan had been in effect for at least ninety (90) calendar days, rate at time employee goes on training based on established plan.
Employee transfers from the Department to a new department after serving under a plan for at least ninety (90) calendar days.	N/A.	Rate the employee and submit rating as required by OpDiv/StaffDiv.
 

Definitions
Appraisal: The process under which performance is reviewed and evaluated.

Appraisal Period: The established period of time for which an employee’s performance will be reviewed and a rating of record prepared. The appraisal period covers the Calendar Year (January 1 through December 31). In the Department, the minimum appraisal period is ninety (90) calendar days. An employee must perform work under a performance plan in place for a minimum of ninety (90) calendar days to receive a rating.

Critical Element: Work assignments or responsibilities of such importance that unacceptable performance on the element would result in a determination that an employee’s overall performance is unacceptable. All elements in the performance plan are critical.

HHS FORM 704B: The standard performance plan used to document all of the written performance elements that an employee is expected to accomplish during the appraisal period. See Performance Plan definition below.

Performance: An employee’s accomplishment of assigned work as specified in the critical elements of the employee’s position.

Performance Management Appraisal Program (PMAP): The framework of Department-wide policies and parameters established for planning, monitoring, developing, evaluating, and rewarding individual performance. The resulting performance information will be used in making personnel decisions.

Performance Awards Budget: The amount of money allocated by the Department and/or the OpDiv/StaffDiv, based on OMB guidelines, for distribution as performance awards to covered employees.

Performance Plan: All of the written performance elements and standards that an employee is expected to accomplish during the appraisal period. These objectives are linked to strategic plans and outcomes of the Department and the OpDivs/StaffDivs. A performance plan must include all critical Elements and their Performance Standards.

Performance Rating: The written appraisal of performance compared to the performance standards for each critical element on which there have been an opportunity to perform for the minimum period, for example ninety (90) calendar days. A performance rating includes the assignment of a summary rating level.

Performance Standard: A statement of the performance threshold, requirement, or expectation for an element that must be met to be appraised at a particular level of performance. A performance standard may focus on, for example, factors such as quality, quantity, timeliness, and manner of performance.

Progress Review: Progress reviews are important for providing consistent performance feedback to employees and can be conducted at any time during the appraisal period. One formal progress review is required and is generally conducted midway through the appraisal period. Ratings are not assigned for progress reviews.

Quality Step Increase (QSI): A permanent increase in basic pay, equivalent to one (1) step within the grade.

Rating Official: The official responsible for informing the employee of the critical elements of his/her position, establishing performance requirements, providing feedback, appraising performance, and assigning the summary rating. The rating official is ordinarily the employee’s immediate supervisor.

Rating of Record: The performance rating, which is prepared at the end of an appraisal period for performance throughout the entire appraisal period. In most cases, a summary rating (see definition below) will become the rating of record.

Reviewing Official: An official having review and approval authority above the rating official. Reviewing officials are ordinarily at a level higher than the rating official.

Summary Rating: Combining the written appraisals of each critical element on which there has been an opportunity to perform for the minimum period of ninety (90) calendar days to assign a summary rating level. The rating official derives the summary rating from appraising the employee’s performance during the appraisal period on each element.

Time-Off Award: An award granted to an employee that allows the employee to take a specified amount of time off from work, with pay, and without charge to leave.






















300-2
HHS Instruction 300-2: HHS Shared Certificates Program
Material Transmitted:
HHS Instruction 300-2, HHS Shared Certificates Program, dated January 31, 2020.

Material Superseded:
Memo of Understanding effective 1/28/2016 -Provisional Authorization to Share Merit Staffing Selection Certificates between HRSA, NIH, and WHRSC.

Memo of Understanding effective 7/19/2018 -Provisional Authorization to Share Merit and Direct Hire Staffing Selection Certificates between HRSA, NIH, and WHRSC.

Background:
This Instruction outlines the policy, requirements, and responsibilities for administering the Department's Shared Certificates Program consistent with federal law, regulations, and the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) guidance.

This issuance is effective immediately and must be carried out in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, bargaining agreements, and Departmental policy.

/s/

J. Blair Duncan
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources
Chief Human Capital Officer

Subject: HHS Shared Certificates Program
300-2-00 Purpose
300-2-10 References
300-2-20 Coverage and Exclusions
300-2-30 Definitions
300-2-40 Roles and Responsibilities
300-2-50 Requirements
300-2-60 Operational Guidance
300-2-70 Documentation and Accountability 

 

300-2-00: Purpose
This Instruction establishes a Shared Certificates Program within the Department of Health and Human Services (Department or HHS) to expedite hiring by permitting HHS Operating/Staff Divisions (OpDivs/StaftDivs) to share a Certificate of Eligibles across HHS when filling certain vacancies under Merit Promotion Procedures (MPP); Direct-Hire Authority (DHA); or when filling positions via a non-competitive  appointment, specifically transfers from another Federal agency, reinstatement, or reemployed annuitant.  (Sharing certificates under Delegated Examining with other federal agencies, 5 CFR §332.408, is not covered by this Instruction. HHS's program may be expanded in the future.)

When provisions of this policy differ from changes in applicable law or regulation, the changes in law or regulation apply.

300-2-10: References
A. 5 U.S.C §2301, Merit system principles exit disclaimer icon

B. 5 U.S.C §2302(b), Prohibited personnel practices exit disclaimer icon

C. 5 U.S.C §3304, Competitive service; examinations exit disclaimer icon

D. 5 U.S.C §§3309 through 3318, Examination, Certification, and Appointment exit disclaimer icon

E. 5 U.S.C §3327, Civil service employment information exit disclaimer icon

F. 5 U.S.C §3330, Government-wide list of vacant positions exit disclaimer icon

G. 5 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) §210.102, Definitions exit disclaimer icon

H. 5 CFR §315, Subpart E, Career or Career-Conditional Employment by Transfer exit disclaimer icon

I. 5 CFR §330.104, Requirements for vacancy announcements exit disclaimer icon

J. 5 CFR §330, Subpart B, Reemployment Priority List (RPL) exit disclaimer icon

K. 5 CFR §330, Subpart F, Agency Career Transition Assistance Plan (CTAP} for Local Surplus and Displaced Employees exit disclaimer icon

L. 5 CFR§330, Subpart G, Interagency Career Transition Assistance Plan (ICTAP) for Displaced Employees exit disclaimer icon

M. 5 CPR §335, Promotion and Internal Placement (Merit Promotion) exit disclaimer icon

N. 5 CPR §337, Subpart B, Direct-Hire Authority 

O. OPM Delegated Examining Operations Handbook - PDF

P. HHS Instruction, 330-2, Career Transition Assistance Plan

300-2-20: Coverage and Exclusions
A   Coverage

This Instruction covers sharing Certificates of Eligibles issued under Merit Promotion Procedures; government-wide Direct-Hire Authority (DHA) or HHS-specific DHA covering more than one (1) OpDiv/StaftDiv; or when filling positions via a non-competitive appointment, specifically transfers from another Federal agency, reinstatement, or reemployed annuitant to make permanent or term competitive service appointments across HHS.

B.   Exclusions

      1. Certificates of Eligibles issued under Delegated Examining Authority (with the exception of certificates issued to fill positions  via a DHA, as described above);

      2. Certificates of Eligibles issued under Merit Promotion for a vacancy open internally to one (1) OpDiv/StaffDiv;

      3. Certificates of Eligibles issued under an HHS-specific Direct-Hire Authority approved by OPM for only one (1) OpDiv/StaftDiv;

      4. Certificates of Eligibles issued for Excepted Service vacancies; and

      5. Certificates of Eligibles issued for the Senior Executive Service (SES).

C.  Bargaining Unit Employees

The provisions of this Instruction pertaining to conditions of employment of bargaining unit employees (e.g., the filling of a position within the scope of the bargaining unit) are fully negotiable in accordance with 5 U.S.C. Chapter 71. Therefore, when the provisions of this Instruction differ from the requirements contained in applicable collective bargaining agreement(s), the agreement takes precedence for bargaining unit employees.

300-2-30: Definitions
A  Calendar Day. Every day of the calendar year including federal holidays and periods when the government is operating under a shutdown furlough (5 CPR §210.102).

B.  Certificates/Certificates of Eligibles. A list of qualified candidates submitted to a hiring manager for appointment consideration in compliance with the appropriate merit staffing procedures.

C.    Direct-Hire Authorit y {DHA). Authority that permits hiring, after public notice, without regard to the rating and ranking procedures and veterans preference provisions of 5 U.S.C §§ 3309 through 3318, and 5 CFR §§211 and 337, Subpart A (OPM Delegated Examining Operations Handbook).

D.    Job Opportunit y Announcement  (JOA). A job announcement posted by an HR Center for an available vacancy.

E.    Merit Promotion (MP) Procedures. A placement made under the authority of 5 CFR §335, Promotion and Internal Placement. With certain important exceptions (e.g., Veterans Employment Opportunities Act) only federal employees who currently hold or previously held a competitive service position may apply for positions that are to be filled under merit promotion procedures.

F.    Ori ginatin g OpDiv/StaffDiv Human Resources Office (Ori gi natin g OHRO ). The human resources office that initiated the hiring action (i.e., posted the JOA).

G.   Receivin g OpDiv/StaffDiv Human Resources Office (Receivin g OHRO). The human resources office that requests a Certificate of Eligibles from an OHRO.

H.    Reemployed Annuitant -A person retired under the Civil Service or Federal Employees Retirement System whose annuity continues after he or she is reemployed by the Federal Government.

I.  Reinstatement -Non-competitive appointment of a person formerly employed in the competitive service (i.e., who either had competitive status or was serving probation when separated) into the competitive service as a career or career-conditional employee (5 CFR Part 315).

J.     Shared Certificates Criteria. The required HHS parameters of a vacancy (job title, series, pay plan, grade level, FPL, duty location, etc.) that must be met in order to share certificates within HHS.  See also Requirements in this Instruction.

K.   Transfer.  A movement of a current career or career-conditional employee in another federal agency to a competitive service position within HHS without a break in service of a single workday (5 CFR §§210.102 and 315.501).

300-2-40: Roles and Responsibilities
A.   HHS Assistant Secretary for Administration, Office of Human Resources (HHS OHR):

      1. Develops Department-wide policy and guidance regarding the Shared Certificates Program consistent with HHS and OPM policies and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.

      2. Provides program oversight of the Shared Certificates Program, consistent with HHS policy and guidance, and applicable federal laws and regulations.

      3. Periodically conducts accountability reviews of OpDiv/StaffDiv procedures, actions, and records to ensure conformance with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.

B.    OpDiv/StaftDiv Human Resources Offices (OHRO):

      1. Comply with this Instruction and any HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.

      2. Designate an OHRO coordinator to administer the day-to-day aspects of the HHS Shared Certificates Program within their serviced division.

      3. Open certificates covered under this policy for 240 calendar days, with no extensions.

      4. Maintain documentation in recruitment case file(s) and/or hiring systems (e.g., USA Staffing, USA Hire) sufficient for third-party reconstruction and for reporting purposes.

      5. Provide records to OPM via HHS OHR on instances of sharing or using shared certificates, upon request.

      6. Cooperate with accountability reviews, or a third-party review or investigation relating to matters pertaining to a shared certificate.

C.   Originating OHRO will:

      1. Clear the HHS Priority Placement Programs (CTAP, ICTAP, and RPL) at initial announcement, in accordance with HHS Instruction 330-2, CTAP, and this Instruction.

      2. Share certificates with interested OHROs, including all case file documentation.  Case file documents must be uploaded in the recruitment and staffing system used to post the job opportunity announcement.

      3. Conduct a quality review of selection(s) prior to sharing a certificate; within seven (7) calendar days from receipt of additional selections; and maintain oversight for each action taken.

      4. Provide notification within seven (7) calendar days to the Receiving OHRO when a selection(s) has been updated in the Staffing system.

      5. Manage case file(s) through audit close out.

D.    Receiving OHRO will:

      1. Verify through job analysis that the minimum qualification requirements (including use of any selective placement factors) and the competencies, or knowledge, skills, and abilities, that were used for the original position are appropriate for their internal position to be filled.

      2. Make selection(s) within 240 calendar days of the date the certificate was created by the Originating OHRO.

      3. Re-clear CTAP, ICTAP, and RPL after 120 calendar days prior to using an HHS shared certificate to make a transfer from another federal agency, in accordance with HHS Instruction 330-2, CTAP, and this Instruction.

      4. Send notification within seven (7) calendar days to the Originating OHRO when selection(s) have been made.

      5. Conduct a quality review of division selection(s) prior to tentative job offer.

      6. Provide selection package(s) after job offer to the Originating OHRO, including all case file documentation  sufficient for third-party reconstruction.

      7. Notify the Originating OHRO within seven (7) calendar days if a selected candidate declines an offer, or if a selected candidate does not onboard with the Department.

300-2-50: Requirements
A.  OpDivs/StaffDivs must adhere to the requirements in this section when filling competitive service positions via Merit Promotion Procedures (for vacancies open HHS-wide or broader); a government-wide or HHS-specific DHA covering more than one (1) OpDiv/StaffDiv; or when filling positions via a non-competitive appointment, specifically transfers from another Federal agency, reinstatement, or reemployed annuitant.  Certificates issued to fill permanent or temporary positions via these hiring authorities must be shared upon request.

B.   The following language must be included in each JOA:  "Additional selections may be made for similar positions  across the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) within the local commuting area(s) of the location identified in this announcement. By applying, you agree to have your application shared with interested selecting official(s) at HHS. Clearance of CTAP/ICTAP will be applied for similar positions  across HHS."

C.    In addition to above, the following requirements must be met in order to make a selection(s) from a HHS shared certificate:

      1. The JOA must be open:

            a. HHS-wide or all federal employees for Merit Promotion;

            b. To the general public for DHA; or

            c. To either all federal employees or the general public for transfers.

      2. The certificate must be active;

      3. The position must be in the same series (see B.15 for interdisciplinary positions);

      4. The position must be at the same grade level and full performance level (FPL);

      5. The position type is the same (permanent or nonpermanent);

      6. The position has the same work schedule (full-time, part-time, etc.), but does not have to be the same tour of duty;

      7. The position must have the same selective factors, if applicable;

      8. The position must have the same testing requirements;

      9. The major duties of the position are the same or similar;

      10. The position must have comparable specialized experience requirements;

      11. The position must have comparable knowledge, skills, and abilities as reflected in the job analysis and standard assessment questions;

      12. The position must be in the same duty location:

            a. The Metropolitan area of Washington, DC is defined as the District of Columbia; Alexandria, Fairfax, and Falls Church Cities, VA.; Arlington, Fairfax, Loudoun, and Prince William Counties, VA.; and Charles, Montgomery, and Prince Georges Counties, MD (5 CFR §210.102);

            b. For all other areas, duty location is defined as the local commuting area (i.e., the geographic area that is usually considered one area for employment purposes; any population center (or two or more neighboring ones) and surrounding localities in which employees live and can be reasonably expected to travel back and forth daily to their place of employment (5 CFR §351.203 and HHS Instruction 330-2, CTAP);

      13. The JOA includes the HHS definition of 'Well Qualified,' the HHS CTAP/ICTAP clearance statement, and the proof of eligibility documents required for CTAP/ICTAP application, as required by HHS Instruction 330-2, CTAP (5 CFR §330.104); and

      14. An officially classified position description (PD) must be used to advertise and fill the position. OpDiv/StaffDiv's must adhere to the classification principles, and may not intentionally modify a position description to meet the requirements in this Instruction for the purposes of sharing or using a shared certificate. Use of a shared certificate may not be appropriate in all cases. If based on the review of the position, the receiving OHRO's position has different specialized experience requirements or critical competencies/KSAs than the original agency's position, then using a shared certificate is not appropriate.

      15. If the announced position was interdisciplinary, a vacancy filled from the announcement must also be an interdisciplinary position of the same series            combinations.

D.    To offer Physician Comparability Allowances (PCA), or Title 38 pay, it must be stated in the announcement.  All other incentives do not have to be included in the announcement unless required by the OHRO's internal procedures.

E.   If an announcement explicitly states that an incentive or flexibility (e.g., Student Loan Repayment, Creditable Service for Annual Leave Accrual) will not be offered, then that incentive may not be offered to any selectee from the announcement.

F.    Any job requirements or flexibilities not listed above and not stated in the original announcement that differ from the position being filled must be communicated to the candidate no later than the tentative job offer so the candidate can make an informed decision to accept or decline the position. This includes financial disclosure reporting, inclusion in a bargaining unit, an increased security clearance or background investigation, Emergency Tier designation, paid relocation, required travel, atypical tour of duty (e.g., early mornings, night hours, weekends, split schedules), drug testing/screening, or any other job requirement or flexibility that differs from the requirements or flexibilities in the original announcement.

G.   Certificates covered by this Instruction are open for 240 calendar days, with no extensions. OHROs must make certificates available for sharing after forty (40) calendar days from the certificate issuance date.

H.   The Originating OHRO must clear the CTAP, ICTAP, and RPL programs, as applicable, at initial announcement, in accordance with HHS Instruction 330-2, CTAP.

I.   OpDivs/StaffDivs may use an HHS certificate that meets the requirements in this section to fill positions via a non-competitive appointment, specifically transfers from another Federal agency, reinstatement, or reemployed annuitant.  (5 CFR §315, Subpart E, is followed to determine tenure and acquisition of competitive status upon transfer.)  When a shared certificate is open for greater than 120 days, the Receiving OHRO must re-clear CTAP, ICTAP, and RPL before filling an HHS position via a non-competitive appointment:

      1. The Receiving OHRO posts a JOA, identical to the original JOA, open to CTAP/ICTAP candidates for five (5) calendar days at a minimum, to re-clear CTAP/ICTAP;

      2. The Receiving OHRO checks the HHS RP Lfor  the local commuting area of the duty location listed in the original JOA;

      3. If any qualified CTAP/ICTAP candidates apply, or qualified RPL candidates are found, those candidates must receive priority consideration before other candidates, in accordance with HHS Instruction 330-2, CTAP.

J.     Receiving OHROs may not object to an applicant's qualifications or eligibility unless the applicant provides new documentation or information that contradicts or conflicts with the original rating.  Receiving OHROs are required to notify the Originating OHRO to provide the new documentation or information. The Originating OHRO will then make the determination on the appropriate course of action based on the new documentation or information.

K.   Candidates will remain referred for consideration while the certificate is open for 240 calendar days provided they are still eligible, unless the candidate requests to withdraw from continued consideration.  This is to ensure applicants have the ability to compete for all vacant positions that may be filled through the JOA.

300-2-60: Operational Guidance
See HHS Shared Certificates Guidance, OHR-01-2020, on HR Policy Library.

300-2-70: Documentation and Accountability
A.  Records associated with personnel actions, including all documentation sufficient for third party reconstruction purposes, must be retained according to the record disposition schedule. Generally, all records created in a given year must be retained for a total of three (3) full years. Records involved in litigation and grievance processes may be destroyed only after official notification is received from OPM, Department of Justice, courts, etc. or if the time limits associated with grievance processes have passed (e.g., before the anniversary date).

         B.  HHS OHR will conduct periodic accountability reviews to analyze compliance with this Instruction, HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
		 
		 
		 
		 
		 
		 
		 
		 
		 
		 
		 
		 
		 
		 
		 
		 
		 
		 
		 
		 
		 
		 
		 
		 
		 
300-3
Instruction 300-3: Detail and Intergovernmental Personnel Act (IPA) Assignments
Material Transmitted:
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 300-3, Details and Intergovernmental Personnel Act (IPA) Assignments, dated 01/18/2023.

HHS-69, Intergovernmental Personnel Act (IPA) Agreement, dated 01/2023

Material Superseded:
HHS Instruction 300-3, Details and Intergovernmental Personnel Act (IPA) Assignments, dated 07/22/2022

Background:
This policy updates HHS OpDiv/StaffDiv ethics responsibilities for details and IPA assignments and establishes a requirement to use form HHS-69, IPA Agreement (2023 or later), for all IPA assignments, extensions, or modifications to ensure IPA assignments meet federal laws and regulations, including the ethics and conflict of interest statutes and regulations.

This policy is effective immediately and must be carried out by OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Centers in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, collective bargaining agreements, and Departmental policy.

Dr. Kimberly A. Steide

W. Robert Leavitt
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources Chief Human Capital Officer

300-3-00 SECTIONS
300-3-10 Purpose
300-3-20 Coverage and Exclusions
300-3-30 References
300-3-40 Definitions
300-3-50 Responsibilities
300-3-60 Employee Details
300-3-70 Intergovernmental Personnel Act (IPA) Assignments
300-3-80 Reimbursable and Non-reimbursable Agreements
300-3-90 Documentation and Accountability

300-3-10 Purpose
This Instruction implements the Department of Health and Human Services (Department or HHS) policy on employee details and Intergovernmental Personnel Act (IPA) assignments.

When provisions of this policy differ from changes in applicable law or regulation, the changes in law or regulation apply.

300-3-20 Coverage and Exclusions
Coverage. This Instruction covers employees defined under 5 U.S.C. §2105, except for those excluded below or otherwise excluded by the rules governing details and IPAs.
Exclusions.
Officers in the uniformed service of the U.S. Public Health Service Commissioned Corp (42 U.S.C. §204, et seq.)
Political appointees are ineligible to serve on IPAs (i.e., Presidential Appointees with Senate confirmation (PAS), Presidential Appointees without Senate confirmation (PA), Non-career Senior Executive Service (NCSES), and Schedule C).
PAS and PA appointees are ineligible to serve on details. (NCSES and Schedule C details are covered under Section 300-3-60.)
Employees of non-federal organizations who are assigned to HHS under contractual agreements, i.e., contractors.
The provisions of this Instruction pertaining to conditions of employment of bargaining unit employees are fully negotiable in accordance with 5 U.S.C. Chapter 71,  and such actions require notification to labor organizations when impacted employees are bargaining unit employees. When the provisions of this Instruction differ from the requirements contained in applicable collective bargaining agreement(s), the collective bargaining agreement takes precedence for bargaining unit employees.
300-3-30 References
2 United States Code (U.S.C.) §4301(i), Committee Staffs 
3 U.S.C. §112, Details of Employees of Executive Departments 
5 U.S.C. §7106, Management Rights 
5 U.S.C. §2105, Employee 
5 U.S.C. §3341, Details within Executive or Military Departments 
5 U.S.C. §3343, Details to International Organizations 
5 U.S.C. §3344, Details, Administrative Law Judges 
5 U.S.C. §§3371-3376, Assignments To and From States  (IPA)
31 U.S.C. §1301, Application (of appropriations) (i.e., the Purpose Statute) 
31 U.S.C. §1535, Agency Agreements (i.e., the Economy Act) 
31 U.S.C. §1536, Crediting Payments Between Executive Agencies  (i.e., the Economy Act)
42 U.S.C. §215, Detail of Public Health Service Personnel 
5 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) §6.5, Assignment of Excepted Service Employees
5 CFR Part 300, Subpart C, Detail of Employees
5 CFR §317.903, Senior Executive Service (SES) Details
5 CFR Part 334, Intergovernmental Personnel Act
5 CFR §335.103, Agency Promotion Programs
5 CFR §§352.301-306 and 314, Detail of Employees to International Organizations
Detail of Law Enforcement Agents to Congressional Committees, 12 Op. Office of Legal Counsel (O.L.C.) 184, 1988 WL 391014 (Sept. 13, 1988) (employee details to the Legislative Branch)
Reimbursement of the Internal Revenue Service for Investigative Services Provided to the Independent Counsel, 12 Op. O.L.C. 233, 1988 WL 391018 (Sept. 30 , 1988); see also Reimbursement for Detail of JAG Corps Personnel to US Attorney’s Office, 13 Op. O.L.C. 188, 1989 WL 595823 (June 27, 1989) (reimbursement for details)
OPM SES Desk Guide - PDF (details)
HHS Financial Management Directives and Guidance (interagency agreements)
HHS Travel Policy (payment of travel and transportation expenses)
Memo from HHS Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources, Delegation of Human Resources Authorities, dated May 9, 2022.
300-3-40 Definitions
Agency. An Executive Department or Agency, as defined in 5 U.S.C. §§101 and 105 (i.e., HHS).
Days. Calendar days.
Detail. A temporary assignment to a different position for a specified period. A federal employee who is on detail continues to occupy their official position of record while on detail and continues to receive pay and federal benefits associated with their permanent position. At the expiration of a detail, federal employees return to their official position of record. See Section 300-3-60.
IPA. The Intergovernmental Personnel Act (IPA) allows for the temporary assignment via a detail or temporary appointment of personnel between the federal government and state and local governments, colleges and universities, Indian tribal governments, federally funded research and development centers, and other eligible organizations defined in 5 U.S.C. §3371 and 5 CFR Part 334. At the end of an IPA assignment, federal employees return to their official position of record or are reassigned to a position of like pay and grade (5 CFR §334.107(b)). See Section 300-3-70.
Public Health Service (PHS). A part of HHS focused on protecting, promoting and advancing public health and safety. The Assistant Secretary of Health (ASH) oversees the PHS, including the Commissioned Corps (not covered by this Instruction). Ten (10) HHS Operating Divisions/Staff Divisions (OpDivs/StaffDivs, or Divisions) are PHS components:
Administration for Strategic Preparedness and Response (ASPR);
Office of Global Affairs (OGA);
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ);
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR);
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC);
Food and Drug Administration (FDA);
Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA);
Indian Health Service (IHS);
National Institutes of Health (NIH); and
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA).
300-3-50 Responsibilities
Immediate Office of the Secretary (IOS). HHS’ White House Liaison initiates details of Non- career SES and Schedule C political employees with OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Centers, adhering to the detail rules covered in this policy (Section 300-3-60).
Assistant Secretary for Administration, Office of Human Resources (ASA/OHR):
Establishes Department-wide HR policy and guidance consistent with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Submits for OPM approval requests to detail an excepted service employee to a competitive service position.
Submits for OPM approval requests for SES details exceeding 240 days if the detail is for either: a) A non-SES employee to an SES position that supervises other SES positions; or b) An SES employee to a position at the GS-15 or equivalent level or below.
Approves requests for details and extension of details to the White House and Congressional Committees, with the concurrence by the Assistant Secretary for Legislation, prior to the start date.
Submits for OPM approval a request of a federal employee to participate in the IPA program more than a total of six (6) years during their federal career.
Periodically reviews OpDiv/StaffDiv details and IPA assignments to assure conformance with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Assistant Secretary for Legislation (ASL):
Reviews and gives concurrence/non-concurrence on detail and extension requests to Congressional Committees.
Notifies the Congressional Committee Chairman by letter of detail approvals.
Office of Global Affairs (OGA):
Reviews and gives concurrence/non-concurrence on detail requests from an OpDiv/StaffDiv Head or written designee to international organizations.
Obtains concurrence by the HHS Secretary to request Secretary of State approval to extend a detail to an international organization beyond five (5) years, in cases where the extension is in the national interest. If the HHS Secretary concurs, submits request to the Department of State for approval.
Obtains Dept. of State approval for international organizations not currently on the Dept. of State’s approved organization list, at the request of the OpDiv/StaffDiv Human Resources Center.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Human Resources Centers:
Comply with this Instruction, any HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Ensure internal guidance or standard operating procedures on details and IPA assignments adhere to this policy.
Work with their servicing organizations to ensure funds for details and IPA assignments are only used for purposes authorized by appropriation (i.e., appropriations of the loaning OpDiv/StaffDiv can only be used to support programs/activities that have been authorized thru appropriation by Congress). See Section 300-3-80.
Ensure signed agreements are in place prior to the effective date of details and IPAs in accordance with the requirements under Sections 300-3-60 and 300-3-70.
Work with their servicing ethics office(s) to ensure: a) detailees and IPA participants complete a financial disclosure report, as required; b) detailees and IPA participants are counseled prior to the effective date of the detail or IPA assignment on applicable ethics statutes and regulations, including the criminal conflict of interest statutes and Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive Branch; and for IPA assignments, c) the Deputy Ethics Counselor (DEC) or Ethics Coordinator (EC) of the servicing ethics office has certified, as required, that IPA participants have been so counseled and that there are no conflicts of interest with the duties and responsibilities of the proposed IPA assignment. See Sections 300-3-60 and 300-3-70.
Submit requests to employmentpolicy@hhs.gov for OPM approval of details of certain excepted service employees to competitive service positions prior to the effective date. See Section 300-3-60.
Submit requests to SESstaffing@hhs.gov for OPM approval of SES details exceeding 240 days if the detail is for either: a) A non-SES employee to an SES position that supervises other SES positions; or b) An SES employee to a position at the GS-15 or equivalent level or below.
Submit detail and extension requests to the White House and Congressional Committees to NationalandSpecialPrograms@hhs.gov prior to the start date.
Submit requests to employmentpolicy@hhs.gov for OPM approval of a federal employee to participate in the IPA program more than a total of (6) years during their federal career.
300-3-60 Employee Details
General Requirements:
Management may utilize details to address emergency or temporary workforce needs; to offset temporary staffing or workload imbalances; or to address short-term special projects or studies, unless the law or regulation authorizing the detail specifies a different purpose (e.g., 42 U.S.C. §215). The decision to detail an HHS employee is discretionary and based on the ability of the employing OpDiv/StaffDiv to spare the employee’s services without detriment to the office’s work and without requiring it to hire additional staff. Details are not used to circumvent the competitive selection or classification process. For the Indian Health Service: Details are also not used to circumvent Indian Preference laws or regulations (25 U.S.C. §§5116, 5117 and 5129, and 42 CFR §§136.41-43). Input from the HHS employee should be considered before implementing a detail.
An employee may be detailed to a position with duties that are classified at a higher grade, a lower grade, or at the same grade level as the employee’s official position.
An employee is not required to meet time-in-grade or minimum qualification requirements of the position to which the employee is detailed, but must meet the education, licensure and certification requirements for the position to which detailed.
A detail may be to a position with unclassified duties, i.e., the duties to be performed on detail may or may not be duties described in an officially established position description (PD). A statement of duties must be prepared, prior to the detail, by the gaining office.
Employees remain in their official position of record while on detail including for the purposes of the computation of basic pay, promotion, retirement, benefits, bargaining unit status, compensation for injury or death, and military benefits. Service while on detail is credited for time-in-grade purposes at the grade of the position the employee officially holds.
An employee’s Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) exemption status may be affected when a detail exceeds 30 consecutive days and the temporary duties meet the criteria described in 5 CFR §551.211.
The employee’s permanent organization is responsible for ensuring the employee on detail receives appropriate consideration for promotions in their official position of record (5 CFR §335.103(b)(2)) and is kept informed of training opportunities.
Performance management and appraisal requirements must comply with HHS Instruction 430-1, Performance Management Appraisal Program, or HHS Instruction 430-6, SES Performance Management Program, as applicable.
All employees must meet the applicable personnel security requirements of the detail assignment prior to commencement of a detail.
Employees remain subject to applicable ethics statutes and regulations while on detail including: 18 U.S.C. §§ 201-227  – Criminal Conflicts of Interest; 5 U.S.C. app.  – Ethics in Government Act of 1978; 5 U.S.C. §§ 7321-7326  and 5 C.F.R. Part 734 – Hatch Act and implementing Political Activities Regulation; 5 U.S.C. § 7342  – Foreign Gifts and Decorations Act; 5 U.S.C. § 7353  – Gifts to Federal Employees; 41 U.S.C. §§ 2101-2107  – Ethics provisions of the Procurement Integrity Act; 5 C.F.R. Part 735 – Employee Responsibilities and Conduct; 5 C.F.R. Part 2634 – Executive Branch Financial Disclosure and Related Requirements; 5 C.F.R. Part 2635 – Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive Branch; 5 C.F.R. Part 5501 – HHS Supplemental Standards of Ethical Conduct; and 5 C.F.R. Part 5502 – HHS Supplemental Financial Disclosure Reporting Requirements. The servicing ethics office of the employing OpDiv/StaffDiv is responsible for communicating these requirements to their employee. Questions should be directed to the servicing Deputy Ethics Counselor and/or Ethics Coordinator, a list of whom can be found at https://www.hhs.gov/about/agencies/ogc/contact-ogc/agency-deputy-ethics-counselors- and-ethics-coordinators/index.html.
Employees on detail remain subject to the provisions of 5 U.S.C. Chapter 73, which regulates employee suitability, security, and conduct, including restrictions on political activity, and agency standards of conduct regulations.
A detail ends upon the Not-To-Exceed (NTE) date documented on the Standard Form (SF) 50 or SF-52 unless an extension is approved. Requests for extending details must be made prior to the NTE date of the detail. See also Section 300-3-90, Documentation.
A detail may be terminated, at the discretion of the loaning or gaining organization, prior to the documented NTE date.
Employees return to their official position of record upon the detail’s NTE date or early termination of the detail.
Details Within HHS (5 U.S.C. §§3341).
Details within HHS must be reimbursable with few exceptions. For additional information, see Section 300-3-80, Reimbursable and Non-reimbursable Agreements.
Work Restriction. 5 U.S.C. §3341(a) does not allow an agency to detail employees who are required by law to be exclusively engaged in specific work. Accordingly, an HHS employee who is appointed by an authority that specifies the type of work to be performed cannot be detailed. This legal prohibition applies to all HHS employees, including politicals and employees appointed via a non-Title 5 hiring authority.
Competitive and Excepted Service Employee Details.
Time Limits.
Details to a position at the same or lower grade level may be made without competition for up to 120 days and can be extended in no more than 120-day increments to meet the organizational needs of both the gaining and lending offices/divisions (5 U.S.C. §3341).
Details to a higher-graded position, or to a position with higher promotion potential, may be made without competition for up to 120 days. When computing the total time served on a detail, noncompetitive details to higher graded positions and noncompetitive time-limited promotions within the prior 12-month period count toward the 120-day total (5 CFR §335.103(c)(1)(ii)).
A detail more than 30 days but less than 120 days to a higher-graded supervisor or manager position should be rotated among eligible staff. Consideration should also be given to a time-limited promotion under 5 CFR §335.102(f).
Competitive service employees may be detailed to competitive service or excepted service positions.
Excepted service employees may be detailed to a position in the excepted service.
A detail of an excepted service employee to a position in the competitive service requires OPM approval prior to the effective date of the detail (5 CFR §6.5 and 5 CFR §300.301).

Exceptions from the OPM approval requirement:
An excepted service employee hired via a Schedule A authority (i.e., a government-wide Schedule A authority under 5 CFR §213.3102 or an OpDiv/StaffDiv-specific Schedule A authority);
A Schedule B authority (under 5 CFR §213.3202);
A Schedule D authority (Pathways Programs under 5 CFR §213.3402(a-c)); or
A Veterans Recruitment Appointment (P.L. 107-288) may be detailed to a competitive service position without prior OPM approval.
Requests for OPM approval to detail excepted service employees to positions in the competitive service are sent to the ASA/OHR for review and concurrence. HR Centers must send such requests with the following information to employmentpolicy@hhs.gov:
Information on the excepted service position (appointment authority and employee’s position of record, including title, series, grade level, and organization);
Information on the competitive service position that will be filled (title, series, grade, and organization);
Purpose of the detail or the duties to be performed during the detail;
Reason why a competitive service employee cannot serve in the detail (e.g., special skills/competencies the excepted service employee will bring to the competitive service position); and
OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Director approval.
SES Details (5 CFR §317.903 and OPM SES Desk Guide - PDF).
Time Limits.
Details of an SES employee to a position classified at the SES-level may be made for up to 120 days and can be extended in no more than 120-day increments to meet the organizational needs of both the gaining and lending offices/divisions.
Details of an SES employee to unclassified duties may be made in no more than 120-day increments and cannot exceed 240 days. For details exceeding 240 days, the HR Center is required to determine if the unclassified duties are at the SES level. If at SES level, the HR Center must request an SES allocation at SESstaffing@hhs.gov to establish a SES position to continue the detail. If below the SES level, OPM approval is required for a detail extension to a position at the GS-15 or equivalent level or below (see (a)(v) immediately below for instructions).
An SES employee may not be detailed to a series of positions with unclassified duties, or a series of positions at the GS-15 or equivalent level, to ‘restart’ the 240-day clock.
Details of a non-SES employee to a SES position must be made in no more than 120-day increments and cannot exceed 240 days. Competitive procedures must be followed when the detail exceeds 240 days unless the employee is eligible for a noncompetitive career SES appointment (i.e., a SES Candidate Development Program graduate or a former SES Career employee with noncompetitive reinstatement eligibility). OpDiv/StaffDivs cannot intentionally create a break before 240 consecutive days to ‘restart’ the 240-day clock. Competition is not required to detail a different employee to the SES position.
OPM must approve details more than 240 days if the detail is either: a) A non-SES employee to an SES position that supervises other SES positions; or b) An SES employee to a position at the GS-15 or equivalent level or below. HR Centers must send such requests with the following information to SESstaffing@hhs.gov:

a) A memorandum from the OpDiv/StaffDiv Head or written designee requesting extension and approval of the detail;

b) A detailed written justification outlining the circumstances requiring the extension, including proposed number of days up to a maximum of 120 days;

c) A written description of how the position’s duties have been performed since vacant and alternatives the OpDiv/StaffDiv considered before making the extension request; and

d) The OpDiv/StaffDiv organization chart, and name and appointment type of the official who supervises the employee on detail.
Details of SES employees cannot be used to circumvent the advance notice requirements for SES reassignments, or the 120-day moratorium on involuntary reassignments following the appointment of a new HHS Secretary or non-career supervisor (PAS, PA, NCSES).
Any SES employee or non-SES employee may be detailed to a SES General position.
Only a Career SES employee or a career-type non-SES employee (i.e., a Competitive or Excepted Service employee in Tenure Group 1 or 2, see OPM.gov/Data Standards/Tenure for definitions) may be detailed to an SES Career Reserved position.
A Non-career SES (NCSES) employee cannot be detailed to a competitive service position.
SES Limited Employees. In addition to the above SES rules:
An SES Limited Term employee can be detailed to a different SES General position if the duties of the SES General position will expire at the end of three (3) years or less;
An SES Limited Emergency employee may be detailed to a different SES General position to meet an urgent, unanticipated bona-fide need; and
SES Limited employees cannot be detailed to a position that does not meet the same conditions that supported OPM’s approval of the SES Limited Term or SES Limited Emergency allocation. This does not prevent temporary ‘acting’ assignments, i.e., the short-term absence of another executive. (OPM SES Desk Guide)
Administrative Law Judges may be detailed in accordance with the rules described under 5 U.S.C. §3344 and 5 CFR §930.207.
Details to External Organizations
To Other Agencies (31 U.S.C. §1535), see Section 300-3-40 for definition of agency.
Details to other agencies must be reimbursable with few exceptions. For additional information, see Section 300-3-80, Reimbursable and Non-reimbursable Agreements.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Head or written designee may detail an employee to another federal agency with the agreement of the Secretary or organization head of the other agency when the detail supports the U.S. Government and appropriated funds are available.
Time Limits.
Competitive and excepted service employees:

a) Details to the same or lower grade may be made for up to 180 days and can be extended for periods that meet the organizational needs of both the gaining and lending agencies.

b) Details to a higher-graded position, or to a position with higher promotion potential, can be made without competition for up to 120 days. When computing the total time served on a detail, all noncompetitive details to higher-graded positions and noncompetitive time-limited promotions within the prior 12-month period count toward the 120-day total (5 CFR §335.103(c)(1)(ii)).

c) PHS employees detailed to other federal agencies via 42 U.S.C. §215 follow the rules in this Section under (C)(4) below.
SES employees: Details to a position classified at the SES-level may be made in no more than 120-day increments and can be extended for periods that meet the organizational needs of both the gaining and lending agencies. SES details are also limited by the rules described in this Section under (B)(4) above.
To International Organizations (5 U.S.C. §3343 and 5 CFR Part 352, Subpart C):
An OpDiv/StaffDiv Head or written designee may authorize the detail of eligible employees (defined in (2)(c)) only to international organizations approved by the Department of State, with the concurrence of the Office of Global Affairs (OGA) prior to the effective date of the detail. Requests are submitted to OGA by the servicing HR Center at os-oga-hhs- globalstaffing@hhs.gov.
Eligible international organizations approved by Dept. of State for details under 5 CFR Part 352, Subpart C, are at: https://iocareers.state.gov/Main/Content/Page/approved- international-organizations. Requests to obtain Dept. of State approval for organizations not on approved list, must be submitted to OGA at os-oga-hhs-globalstaffing@hhs.gov.
Eligible Employees. All employees are eligible for international details except the employees listed under 5 CFR §352.305, i.e., a person serving on a temporary appointment; an SES employee on a non-career, limited emergency, or limited term appointment; a Presidential appointment; or a Schedule C appointment.
Time Limits.
Employees may serve on details to international organizations for up to five (5) consecutive years. The Secretary of State, upon the recommendation of the HHS Secretary, may approve an extension up to three (3) additional years if the detail extension is in the national interest. Extension requests are submitted by the HR Center to OGA at os-oga-hhs-globalstaffing@hhs.gov no later than three (3) months before the expiration of the current detail, and must include a justification why the extension request is needed; the extension request from the international organization; and the finance agreement between the OpDiv/StaffDiv and the international organization, see Section 300-3-80.
Employees cannot serve longer than a total of eight (8) years on international details (or combination of details and transfers) during their entire federal career. (Transfers to international organizations are covered by 5 CFR §§352.307-314 and HHS Instruction 301-1, Overseas Employment.)
Details to international organizations via 5 CFR Part 352, Subpart C, may be reimbursable or non-reimbursable, in accordance with 5 U.S.C. §3343(d-e) and Section 300-3-80.
The Dept. of State foreign country clearance requirements apply to all U.S. government employees working overseas. See HHS Instruction 301-1, Overseas Employment, for requirements or consult OGA at OSPassports@hhs.gov.
To White House (WH) and Congressional Committees:
Details to the WH office, the Executive Residence at the WH, the Office of the Vice  President, the Domestic Policy Staff, and the Office of Administration via 3 U.S.C. §112:
An OpDiv/StaffDiv Head or written designee may occasionally recommend one of their employees be detailed to an office listed in (3)(a) immediately above.
Details after the first 180 days must be reimbursable to the Department, except when the requirements described in Section 300-3-80(B)(5) are met.
When the employee is performing work that would otherwise by performed by WH staff, reimbursement for the salary of the HHS employee/detailee is required for any period occurring after the first 180 days after the employee is detailed during any fiscal year.
A detail to a WH office not listed in (3)(a) above who asserts it is not covered by 3 U.S.C. §112 and therefore not required to reimburse the employing OpDiv/StaffDiv is only permissible if the requirements described in Section 300-3-80(B)(5) are met.
Details to Congressional Committees (2 U.S.C. §4301(f)):
Must be initiated by the Senate or House of Representatives, via the HHS Assistant Secretary for Legislation, by written invitation.
Require the written consent of the Committee on Rules and Administration of the Senate or the Committee on House Oversight of the House of Representatives prior to the effective date.
Must be carried out on a reimbursable basis (Detail of Law Enforcement Agents to Congressional Committees, 12 Op. O.L.C. 184, 1988 WL 391014 (Sept. 13, 1988)).
Time Limits for WH and Congressional Details.
Competitive and excepted service employees:

a) Details to the same or lower grade may be made for up to 180 days and can be extended for periods that meet the organizational needs of both the WH or Congress and the employing HHS OpDiv/StaffDiv.

b) Details to a higher-graded position, or to a position with higher promotion potential, can be made without competition for up to 120 days. When computing the total time served on a detail, all noncompetitive details to higher-graded positions and noncompetitive time-limited promotions within the prior 12-month period count toward the 120-day total (5 CFR §335.103(c)(1)(ii)).

c) PHS employees detailed to Congressional committees via 42 U.S.C. §215 follow the rules in this Section under (C)(4) immediately below.
SES employees: Details to a position classified at the SES-level may be made in no more than 120-day increments and can be extended for periods that meet the organizational needs of both the WH or Congress and the employing HHS OpDiv/StaffDiv. SES details are additionally limited by the rules described in this Section under (B)(4) above.
Required Approval. Details and extensions to the WH and Congressional Committees require ASA/OHR approval prior to the effective date. ASA/OHR will coordinate requests with the Assistant Secretary for Legislation and HHS’ WH Liaison (as applicable) for concurrence. Requests must be signed by the OpDiv/StaffDiv Head or written designee and submitted to NationalandSpecialPrograms@hhs.gov and include:
Employee’s full name;
The WH or Congressional Committee Office;
Description of the duties that support HHS’ or the employing OpDiv/StaffDiv’s mission;
The proposed start date and duration of the detail;
A completed interagency agreement or MOU, as applicable (see Section 300-3-80);
For Details to Congress (unless the detail is via 42 U.S.C. §215 explained in (C)(4) immediately below): A copy of the Congressional Committee’s written request for the employee’s services; and
For WH Offices who are not covered by 3 U.S.C. §112: The statutory authority that explicitly authorizes the detail and explicitly says the WH office does not reimburse loaning agencies for details; or a description of the functions of the detail demonstrating the duties are directly related to the OpDiv/StaffDiv’s appropriations and the detail will assist the OpDiv/StaffDiv in accomplishing programs/activities authorized by appropriation.
Due to the substantial ethical concerns such details raise, recommendation and/or approval may be given only after a careful examination of the duties to be performed and consideration of any Departmental conflicts of interest that may arise from the detail assignment.
Public Health Service (PHS) Details (42 U.S.C. §215):
PHS employees (excluding Commissioned Corp Officers not covered by this policy) may be detailed to the following external organizations for specified purposes:
Another Executive Department, upon the request of that Department Head, to cooperate in or conduct work related to, the functions of the requesting Department or the PHS. See Section 300-3-40, Definitions, or 5 U.S.C. §101.
State health or mental health authorities, upon the request of the State health authority, to assist the State, or a political subdivision of the State, in work related to the public health functions of the PHS. These details may only be made by the HHS Secretary or the Secretary’s designee, per 42 U.S.C. §§ 202, note and 215(b).
Congressional committees and non-profit educational, research, or other institutions engaged in health activities, for special studies of scientific problems and for the dissemination of information relating to public health. These details may only be made by the HHS Secretary or the Secretary’s designee, per 42 U.S.C. §§ 202, note and 215(c).
Approval. Details of PHS employees to the external organizations for the purposes described in (a) immediately above can be approved by the OpDiv/StaffDiv Head or written designee consistent with the Memo from HHS Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources, Delegation of Human Resources Authorities, dated May 9, 2022. Due to the substantial ethical concerns such details raise, recommendation and/or approval may be given only after a careful examination of the public health duties to be performed and consideration of any Departmental conflicts of interest that may arise from the detail assignment. Approvals must be in writing and include the purpose of the detail, consistent with the requirements in this subsection (C)(4).
Time Limits. Details of PHS employees to the external organizations for the purposes described in (a) immediately above can be approved for a period of time that meets the public health mission of the OpDiv/StaffDiv and the organizational needs of requesting external organization described above, except for the following:
Competitive and excepted service employee details to a higher-graded federal position, or to a position with higher promotion potential, can be made without competition for up to 120 days. (This restriction applies to the Executive Department and Congressional committee details described in (a)(i) and (iii) above.) When computing the total time served on a detail, all noncompetitive details to higher-graded positions and noncompetitive time-limited promotions within the prior 12-month period count toward the 120-day total (5 CFR §335.103(c)(1)(ii)).
SES details are additionally limited by the rules described in this Section under (B)(4) above.
Details to an overseas location (see (g) below).
Details of PHS employees to the external organizations for the purposes described under (a) above may be reimbursable or non-reimbursable, in accordance with 42 U.S.C. §215 and Section 300-3-80:
An OpDiv/StaffDiv Head or written designee may condition a detail to either (a)(ii) or (iii) above as reimbursable by the State, subdivision, or institution (42 U.S.C. §215(d)).
Salary and allowances of a PHS employee detailed to another Executive Department described in (a)(i) above are paid in accordance with 42 U.S.C. §215(a).
A PHS employee on a detail to either (a)(ii) or (iii) above is paid by PHS appropriations except when the employee is placed on leave without pay (LWOP), with the employee’s consent, and paid by the State, subdivision, or institution to which they are detailed (42 U.S.C. §215(d)).

For Special Consultant employees appointed via 42 U.S.C. §209(f), a LWOP arrangement may only be for a period NTE two (2) years but can be extended for additional periods NTE two (2) years each (42 CFR §22.5).
PHS employee details within HHS. 42 U.S.C §215 does not authorize details within HHS; therefore, details within HHS must follow the rules (including time limits, restrictions, and applicable OPM approvals to a competitive service position) in this Section under (B) above.
PHS employee details to the White House. Details to the WH are not authorized via 42 U.S.C. §215; therefore, WH details are made via 3 U.S.C. §112 and the rules described in this Section under (C)(3) above.
PHS employee details to International Organizations are made via 5 CFR Part 352, Subpart C, and the rules described in this Section under (C)(2) above.

Overseas Location: Details to an overseas location of an Executive Department, state health authority, or institution described in (a) above can be made via 42 U.S.C. §215 and do not require Dept. of State organization approval. However, the Dept. of State foreign country clearance requirements apply to all U.S. government employees working overseas. Details to overseas locations additionally must adhere the other requirements in HHS Instruction 301-1, Overseas Employment, including tour of duty limits.
Details (i.e., Rotational Assignments) for Employees in Formal Training Programs:
Pathways Programs (5 CFR Part 362 and HHS Instruction, 362-1, Pathways Programs).
The general requirements for details in this Section (300-3-60(A)) and the rules for reimbursable and non-reimbursable agreements in Section 300-3-80 must be followed.
Pathways participants (with the exception of Intern NTE) may be detailed for one (1) to six (6) months in duration within their employing OpDiv/StaffDiv, or anywhere within HHS. Details do not need to be in same occupation in which the participant will likely convert; however, must be for the purposes of providing the participant with valuable knowledge, skills, and experiences; to broaden their perspective of the OpDiv/StaffDiv and/or HHS mission; and to aid in their retention. Such details may be used to give the participant knowledge, skills, or abilities in another area of the functional discipline of the participant’s occupation, or in another OpDiv/StaffDiv with similar occupations, for example.
Presidential Management Fellows (PMFs) may also be detailed to external organizations as part of their development, in accordance with 5 CFR §362.405(b)(4-5) and the rules described in HHS Instruction, 362-1, Pathways Programs.
All other employee rotational assignments (i.e., details) as part of a formal training or development program must follow the rules in this policy, unless the program is authorized by a law or regulation that specifies separate rules for such rotational assignments.
300-3-70 Intergovernmental Personnel Act (IPA) Assignments
The Intergovernmental Personnel Act (IPA) authorizes temporary assignments via detail or temporary appointment of permanent employees between the federal government and state and local governments, colleges and universities, Indian tribal governments, federally funded research and development centers and other eligible organizations (5 U.S.C. Chapter 33, Subchapter VI, and 5 CFR Part 334). The IPA program allows agencies to access expertise from outside the federal government and provide eligible federal employees with developmental opportunities.
IPA assignments are initiated by management and must be mutually beneficial to both the employing OpDiv/StaffDiv and the non-federal organization. Assignments are voluntary and must be agreed to by the employee. Each IPA assignment must be examined to ensure it supports the participating organizations’ mission. Cost sharing arrangements are negotiated between the two participating organizations adhering to the requirements in this Section and Section 300-3-80. The OpDiv/StaffDiv may agree to reimburse the non-federal organization for all, some, or none of the costs of the assignment. (Questions on miscellaneous expenses not covered in this policy should be directed to the HR Center’s servicing finance staff. See Section 300-3-80(G).)
Eligible Employees (5 U.S.C. §3372 and 5 CFR §334.102). See OPM.gov/Data Standards/Tenure for tenure group definitions.
Competitive Service Employees in Tenure Group 1 or 2;
Excepted Service Employees in Tenure Group 1 or 2 (including equivalent tenured non-Title 5 employees, and excluding Indefinite, time-limited, PA/PAS, and Schedule C excepted service appointments);
Career SES Employees (excludes Non-career, Limited Term or Limited Emergency SES); and
Individuals employed for at least 90 days in a career position with a State, local, or Indian tribal government, institution of higher education, or other eligible organization.
Eligible Organizations are State or local governments, colleges or universities, Indian tribal governments, or other organizations defined by 5 U.S.C. §3371 and described under 5 CFR §334.102. Organizations must be certified to participate in an IPA prior to assignment. HR Centers are responsible for verifying an organization’s eligibility and certifying the organization, if necessary, prior to the IPA assignment. Information listed under 5 CFR §334.103 is required from organizations requesting IPA certification. If an organization has previously been certified by a federal agency (or another OpDiv/StaffDiv), the certification is permanent. HR Centers may accept a copy of the federal agency’s or OpDiv/StaffDiv’s certification as proof of eligibility or require the organization to resubmit information to verify the organization still meets the criteria. The list of the National Science Foundation’s designated Federally Funded Research and Development Centers eligible for IPA participation can be found at NSF.gov.
Type of Assignment.
Federal Employees: Detail. With the consent of the employee, IPA assignments may also be made by placing the employee on leave without pay.
Non-federal Employees: Detail or a temporary excepted service appointment.
Work schedule: IPA assignments may be intermittent, part-time, or full-time.
Time Limits (5 U.S.C. §3372 and 5 CFR §334.104):
IPA assignments may be made for up to two (2) years and may be extended by the OpDiv/StaffDiv Head or written designee for an additional two (2) years when the extension benefits both organizations.
IPA assignments of federal employees to Indian tribes or tribal organizations (defined at 5 U.S.C. §3371(2)(C)) may be made for up to two (2) years and may be extended for any length of time by the OpDiv/StaffDiv Head or written designee when the continuation of the assignment will benefit both the OpDiv/StaffDiv and the Indian tribe or tribal organization. If the assigned employee fails to complete the period of assignment and there is another employee willing and available to do so, the OpDiv/StaffDiv Head or written designee may assign the employee to complete the period of assignment and execute an agreement with the tribal organization with respect to the replacement employee. The new agreement may provide for a different period of assignment as agreed to by both the OpDiv/StaffDiv and the tribal organization. (5 U.S.C. §3372(a))
OpDivs/StaffDivs cannot send or receive an individual on an IPA assignment if the individual has served four (4) continuous years on a single IPA assignment without at least a 12-month return to duty with his/her official employer. Consecutive IPA assignments without a break of at least 60 days is regarded as continuous service under IPA. (Assignments to Indian tribes or tribal organizations excluded.)
Federal employees are prohibited from participating on IPA assignment(s) for more than a total of six (6) years during their federal career. HR Center requests to waive this provision must be submitted to employmentpolicy@hhs.gov for OPM approval, consistent with 5 CFR §334.104. (Assignments to Indian tribes or tribal organizations excluded.)
Federal Employees.
Federal employees on IPA assignments remain employees of HHS (i.e., their employing OpDiv/StaffDiv), occupying their official position of record, including for the purposes of the computation of basic pay, promotion, retirement, benefits, bargaining unit status, compensation for injury or death, and military benefits. Service while on an IPA assignment is credited for time-in-grade purposes at the grade of the position the employee officially holds. Employees are required to fulfill any mandatory training requirements while on assignment, and supervisors must consider employees for promotion (5 CFR §335.103(b)(2)). Employees return to their official position of record upon completion of assignment or are reassigned to a position of like pay and grade (5 CFR §334.107(b)).
The rate of pay for a federal employee assigned to a federally funded research and development center may not exceed the rate of pay the employee would be paid for continued service in his/her HHS official position of record (5 U.S.C. §3372(e)(1)).
Federal employees on leave without pay (LWOP) and on an IPA assignment to a state or local government are:
Entitled to receive supplemental pay from their employing OpDiv/StaffDiv, if the state or local government rate of pay is less than the rate of pay the employee would have received had he/she not agreed to the IPA assignment. Supplemental pay is in amount equal to the difference between their official rate of pay and the state or local government rate (5 U.S.C. §3373(c)(1)); and
Entitled to the continuation of federal health and life insurance as long as the employee continues to make employee contributions; and are entitled to credit for the period of the IPA assignment toward federal retirement and unemployment compensation as specified under 5 U.S.C. §3373(c)(3), except as limited therein.
Rules on the election and receipt of benefits due to compensable injury or death are described under 5 U.S.C. §3373(d).
See also OPM Fact Sheet: Effect of Extended LWOP on Federal Benefits and Programs.
Non-federal employees must be employed at least 90 days in a permanent/career position with a State or local government, college or university, Indian tribal government, or other organization described under 5 U.S.C. §3371 and 5 CFR §334.102 to be eligible for an IPA assignment. They serve on either a detail or a temporary excepted appointment, in accordance with 5 U.S.C. §§3371-3375 and OPM.gov/Intergovernmental Personnel Act:
Detail
Non-federal employees may be detailed to competitive, excepted, or SES General positions.
Non-federal employees detailed to HHS OpDivs/StaffDivs remain employees of their non-federal organization. They continue to be paid by their non-federal employer; are not covered by the federal government leave system; and are not eligible to enroll in the federal health benefits programs, group life insurance, or the federal retirement system.
Non-federal employees detailed to a classified position earn the basic rate of pay, including locality, equal to the salary of the classified position. If the detailee’s non- federal salary is less than the minimum rate of pay of the classified position, the OpDiv/StaffDiv must supplement their non-federal salary to make up the difference. Supplemental pay cannot be paid in advance or in a lump sum and is not conditional on completion of the assignment. Supplemental pay may be paid directly to the detailee or reimbursed to the non-federal organization.
Non-federal employees detailed to unclassified duties continue to be paid directly by their non-federal organization at a rate of pay based on the individual’s non-federal job.
Non-federal employees detailed under IPA may supervise a project and perform certain team lead duties (e.g., set due dates, identify resources, track progress and the completion of work, etc.,); however, they cannot perform supervisory or team lead functions that impact an employee (e.g., assign roles, participate in performance reviews, recommend awards, take disciplinary action, approve/disapprove leave requests or personnel actions, etc.). In addition, non-federal employees cannot perform the inherently governmental functions as discussed in Public Law 105-270, Section 5, and Office of Federal Procurement Policy Letter 11-01, Performance and Management of Inherently Governmental and Critical Functions, (76 FR 56227-01) (Sept. 12, 2011), including but not limited to serving as a manager or supervisor; implementing or administering grants, contracts, policies; directly exerting control over appropriated funds; or signing personnel actions.
Detailees generally have the same workweek and hours of duty as federal employees in the OpDiv/StaffDiv to which they are assigned unless the workweek of the permanent employees is shorter than the federal workweek by law or local ordinance. Detailees are eligible to telework and participate in alternate work schedule arrangements of the OpDiv/StaffDiv, consistent with HHS Instruction 990-1, Workplace Flexibilities.
Non-federal employees detailed to HHS can receive recognition through letters of appreciation or commendation but are not eligible for incentive awards (5 U.S.C. Chapter 45) or Quality Step Increases (QSI).
Temporary Excepted Service Appointment
Non-federal employees who are placed on a temporary excepted appointment are considered temporary federal employees for the duration of the appointment and must meet the OPM qualification requirements for the series and grade of the position they are appointed to.
Typically, a non-federal employee is appointed at the minimum rate of the grade being filled; however, if an OpDiv/StaffDiv wants to pay an advanced step rate for a position at GS-11 through GS-15 based on superior qualifications, it may do so in accordance with HHS Instruction 531-1, Setting Pay Based on Superior Qualifications or Special Needs.
Non-federal employees who are placed on temporary appointments are entitled to cost- of-living allowances and other pay differentials (5 CFR Part 550); are eligible for incentive awards (5 U.S.C. Chapter 45); and earn leave in the same manner as other federal employees.
Eligibility for within-grade increases (WGI) is dependent on the length of appointment; however, employees appointed to successive temporary appointments of one (1) year or less are not eligible for a WGI, even if the time under successive temporary appointments exceeds one (1) year.
Non-federal employees appointed to a temporary appointment are not eligible to enroll in the Federal Employees Health Benefits program unless their federal appointment results in the loss of coverage under the non-federal health benefits system (5 U.S.C. §3374).
Non-federal employees placed on temporary appointments under IPA are not covered by any retirement system for federal employees, or by the Federal Employee Group Life Insurance Program.
A non-federal employee placed on a temporary excepted service appointment under IPA may supervise HHS employees.
Consult 5 U.S.C. §3374 for information on compensation for personal injury while on duty; death benefits; and for instances where a state or local government fails to continue employer contributions to retirement or benefit plans.
Citizenship Requirement. The Consolidated Appropriations Act (i.e., the annual federal budget) prohibits federal agencies from compensating individuals who are not U.S. citizens or nationals for any federal position within the U.S., unless the agency has a statutory exemption to the ban. HHS does not have an exemption to compensate non-U.S. citizens in temporary appointments under IPA. OpDivs/StaffDivs who are considering appointing a non-U.S. citizen without pay to a temporary excepted service appointment under IPA or detailing a non-U.S. citizen to a federal position under IPA should consult the Office of the General Counsel prior to the effective date of the IPA assignment to ensure the action and any related payments are legally supportable with the Appropriations Act.
Required IPA Agreement.
Prior to the effective date of an IPA assignment, the assigned employee and the employing OpDiv/StaffDiv, the State or local government, Indian tribal government, institution of higher education, or other eligible organization must sign an IPA agreement listing the conditions and obligations of both parties (5 CFR §334.106).
If the IPA assignment is reimbursable, a finance agreement must also be completed following the requirements in Section 300-3-80 of this policy.
Form HHS-69, IPA Agreement (2023 or later), - PDF must be completed for all HHS IPA assignments, extensions, or modifications. The form contains the information required by OPM for IPA assignments and by the HHS Designated Agency Ethics Official to ensure proposed assignments will not violate conflict of interest statutes. HHS-69 can be found on HHS Intranet Forms and must be completed and signed by all parties listed on the form prior to the effective date of the IPA assignment.
IPA agreements must be modified if there are significant changes to the agreement during the assignment (e.g., changes to employee's duties, responsibilities, salary, work assignment location, supervisory relationships, etc.). The servicing Deputy Ethics Counselor (DEC) or Ethics Coordinator (EC) must be consulted prior to implementing changes to the duties and responsibilities of an IPA assignment to ensure there are no conflicts of interest. A list of DECs and ECs can be found at https://www.hhs.gov/about/agencies/ogc/contact-ogc/agency-deputy- ethics-counselors-and-ethics-coordinators/index.html.
Federal employees participating on an IPA assignment must agree to serve at HHS upon completion of the assignment for a period equal to the length of the IPA assignment. Employees are required to reimburse their employing OpDiv/StaffDiv for the cost of the assignment (not including salary and benefits) if the employee does not fulfill this agreement. The OpDiv/StaffDiv Head or written designee may waive this reimbursement requirement and reason(s) must be documented. (5 U.S.C. §3372 and 5 CFR §334.105)
All individuals on an IPA assignment, whether assigned to HHS or to a non-federal organization, are subject to applicable ethics statutes and regulations including: 18 U.S.C. §§ 201-227  – Criminal Conflicts of Interest; 5 U.S.C. app.  – Ethics in Government Act of 1978; 5 U.S.C. §§ 7321-7326  and 5 C.F.R. Part 734 – Hatch Act and implementing Political Activities Regulation; 5 U.S.C. § 7342  – Foreign Gifts and Decorations Act; 5 U.S.C. § 7353  – Gifts to Federal Employees; 41 U.S.C. §§ 2101-2107  – Ethics provisions of the Procurement Integrity Act; 5 C.F.R. Part 735 – Employee Responsibilities and Conduct; 5 C.F.R. Part 2634 – Executive Branch Financial Disclosure and Related Requirements; 5 C.F.R. Part 2635 – Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive Branch; 5 C.F.R. Part  5501 – HHS Supplemental Standards of Ethical Conduct; and 5 C.F.R. Part 5502 – HHS Supplemental Financial Disclosure Reporting Requirements. IPA assignees are responsible for notifying their employing OpDiv/StaffDiv of any additional Government work they are engaged in or become engaged in during the assignment (e.g., detail with another federal agency, service on a federal advisory committee (FACA), volunteer work at another federal agency, etc.), and for obtaining any requisite approvals or waivers before engaging in such additional work. The servicing ethics office of the employing OpDiv/StaffDiv is responsible for communicating these requirements to the IPA assignee. (This information is covered on form HHS-69, IPA Agreement. - PDF)
Non-federal employees on assignment to the federal government are subject to the provisions of 5 U.S.C. Chapter 73, which regulates employee suitability, security, and conduct, including restrictions on political activity, and agency standards of conduct regulations.
HR Centers must consult/work with their finance, personnel security, ethics and labor and employee relations staff, and the Office of the General Counsel to implement an IPA agreement, including ensuring the servicing ethics office provides counseling on applicable ethics statutes and regulations and assigns a financial disclosure report for completion by an assignee to HHS, as required.
An IPA assignment may be terminated at any time at the request of HHS or the non-federal organization. Where possible, the party requesting termination should provide a 30-day advance written notice to the other parties of the agreement.
300-3-80 Reimbursable and Non-reimbursable Agreements
Funds for details and IPA assignments can only be used for purposes authorized by appropriation, i.e., the appropriations of the loaning OpDiv/StaffDiv can only be used to support programs/activities that have been authorized thru appropriation by Congress (31 U.S.C. §1301(a)).
Details (for details via IPA, see (C) immediately below):
Details within HHS must be reimbursable. Exceptions to this rule are (5)(a) or (b) immediately below.
Details to another agency must be reimbursable. Exceptions to this rule are (5)(a) and (b) immediately below. See Section 300-1-40 for agency definition.
Details to Congressional committees under 2 U.S.C. §4301(f) must be reimbursable (Detail of Law Enforcement Agents to Congressional Committees, 12 Op. O.L.C. 184, 1988 WL 391014 (Sept. 13, 1988)), see Section 300-3-60(C)(3). No exceptions.
Details to the WH office, the Executive Residence at the WH, the Office of the Vice President, the Domestic Policy Staff, and the Office of Administration via 3 U.S.C. §112:
Details after the first 180 days must be reimbursable to the Department, except when the requirements in (5)(b) immediately below are met.
When the employee is performing work that would otherwise by performed by WH staff, reimbursement for the salary of the HHS employee/detailee is required for any period occurring after the first 180 days after the employee is detailed during any fiscal year.
A detail to a WH office not listed in (4) immediately above who asserts it is not covered by 3 U.S.C. §112 and therefore not required to reimburse the employing OpDiv/StaffDiv is only permissible if the requirements described in (5)(b) immediately below are met.
Non-reimbursable details can be made only when either:
A law specifically authorizes non-reimbursable details, for example:
Details to international organizations via 5 CFR Part 352, Subpart C, may be reimbursable or non-reimbursable (5 U.S.C. §3343(d-e)).
PHS employee details to the external organizations listed in Section 300-3-60(C)(4) may be reimbursable or non-reimbursable (42 U.S.C. §215). For additional Title 42 reimbursement requirements, see Section 300-3-60(C)(4)(d).
OR
The functions of the detail are related to the loaning agency’s/division’s appropriations and the detail will assist the loaning agency/division in accomplishing programs/activities authorized by appropriation. (Reimbursement of the Internal Revenue Service for Investigative Services Provided to the Independent Counsel, 12 Op. O.L.C. 233, 1988 WL 391018 (Sept. 30 , 1988); see also Reimbursement for Detail of JAG Corps Personnel to US Attorney’s Office, 13 Op. O.L.C. 188, 1989 WL 595823 (June 27, 1989))
IPA Assignments (Details or Temporary Excepted Appointments via IPA):
Cost sharing arrangements are negotiated between the two participating organizations following the requirements in this Section and Section 300-3-70. The OpDiv/StaffDiv may agree to reimburse the non-federal organization for all, some, or none of the costs of the assignment. (Questions on miscellaneous expenses not covered in this policy should be directed to the HR Center’s servicing finance staff. See (G) below.)
Pay, travel and transportation expenses for federal employees on an IPA assignment to state or local governments may be reimbursable or non-reimbursable (5 U.S.C. §3373(b)).
Travel and transportation expenses for individuals on an IPA assignment from federal, state, or local governments may be reimbursable or non-reimbursable (5 U.S.C. §3375).
Payment of travel and transportation expenses is made consistent with the HHS Travel Policy.
A federal employee may not receive pay in addition to the pay of their official position of record for performing the duties of another position (5 U.S.C. §5535(b)).
Required Finance Agreement for Reimbursable Details and IPA Assignments. Inter or Intra Agency Agreements (IAA) are either between two federal agencies (inter-agency) or two HHS OpDiv/StaffDivs (intra-agency). IAAs describe the services to be performed; identify the legal authority to transfer funds from one appropriation to another; and must be executed and recorded prior to the start of the detail or IPA assignment in accordance with HHS Financial Management  Directives and Guidance (FMD&G), Chapter 2 Interagency Agreement, using the Department of Treasury forms required by the FMD&G.
OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Centers should consult their division’s servicing finance staff on executing IAAs; how to document financial agreements with non-federal organizations; and any questions on payment of expenses not covered in this policy. The legal and regulatory requirements covered in this policy regarding reimbursable and non-reimbursable expenses take precedence when there is a conflict with ASFR policy decisions. Per the FMD&G, HR Centers should notify their servicing finance officer of any such policy conflicts.
Non-reimbursable Agreements. Participating organizations should execute a MOU for non- reimbursable details to document the terms of the detail. MOU examples can be found on OPM.gov. Non-reimbursable IPAs are documented via the IPA agreement, see Section 300-3-70.
Service Agreements.
IPA Assignment: The service requirement is included on the IPA agreement, see Section 300-3-70, Required IPA Agreement.
Non-Reimbursable Detail (outside of IPA): A service requirement, if applicable, is documented on a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU), see H. immediately above.
Reimbursable Details (outside of IPA): HR Centers should consult their servicing finance office on how to document a service requirement, e.g., whether to include the requirement on the IAA, attach the service agreement to the IAA, etc.
300-3-90 Documentation and Accountability
Details and IPA assignments are documented in accordance with OPM’s Guide to Processing Personnel Actions (GPPA):
Chapter 11, Excepted Service Appointments. Temporary appointment of non-federal employees under IPA (5 U.S.C. §3374).
Chapter 14, Details. A SF-50 or SF-52 is used, depending on type of action, and retained on the permanent side of the employee’s official personnel folder. In cases where the GPPA says no documentation is required, a SF-52 is used consistent with 5 U.S.C. §3341 which requires details to be documented in writing and approved by an agency official. 42 U.S.C. §215 is cited as the legal authority for details of PHS personnel to external organizations listed in Section 300-3-60(C)(4).
Chapter 15, Placement on Non-Pay or Non-Duty Status. LWOP actions.
Special Government Employees.   Remark code E21 should be used for individuals who are designated special government employees (SGE) as defined under 18 U.S.C. §202. Questions regarding the SGE ethics designation should be directed to an OpDiv/StaffDiv’s servicing ethics office. A list of servicing Deputy Ethics Counselors and Ethics Coordinators can be found at https://www.hhs.gov/about/agencies/ogc/contact-ogc/agency-deputy-ethics-counselors-and-  ethics-coordinators/index.html.
Records, including IPA agreements (and any modifications), proof of IPA organization eligibility, financial agreements, and all documentation sufficient for third party reconstruction purposes, must be retained for a total of three (3) full years after completion of the detail or IPA assignment in accordance with this Instruction and 5 CFR §334.106(b). Records involved in litigation and grievance processes may be destroyed only after official notification is received from OPM, Department of Justice, courts, the Office of the General Counsel, etc. that the matter has been fully litigated, or resolved, and closed.
ASA/OHR Policy and Accountability Division (PAD) or OPM may conduct accountability reviews to ensure compliance with this Instruction, HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.





















301-1
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 301-1, Overseas Employment
Material Transmitted:
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 301-1, Overseas Employment, dated December 15, 2022.

Materials Superseded:
HHS Instruction 301-1, Overseas Employment, dated February 28, 2014

HHS Instruction, 352-1, Reemployment Rights, dated May 24, 1996

Memorandum from Assistant Secretary for Administration, Update to HHS Instruction 301-1, Overseas Employment, dated July 9, 2020

Memorandum from Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources, Update to HHS Instruction 301-1, Overseas Employment, dated June 12, 2020

All previous policy, guidance, standard operating procedures, and memos on overseas employment within HHS are cancelled by the issuance of this policy. 

Background:
This Instruction has been revised to update Department policy on overseas employment consistent with HHS and the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) policy and guidance, and applicable laws and regulations.  HHS Operating and Staff Divisions (OpDivs/StaffDivs) are responsible for ensuring all overseas assignments adhere to this policy.  Employees should contact their servicing HR Center with any questions at https://intranet.hhs.gov/hr/contact-your-hr-center.

This policy is effective immediately and must be carried out by OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Centers in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, collective bargaining agreements, and Departmental policy.

/s/                                                                                 
W. Robert Leavitt
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources
Chief Human Capital Officer

301-1-00 SECTIONS
301-1-10  Purpose
301-1-20  Coverage and Exclusions
301-1-30  References
301-1-40  Definitions
301-1-50  Responsibilities
301-1-60  Foreign Country Clearance
301-1-70  Tour of Duty
301-1-80  Recruitment and Staffing
301-1-90  Pay, Leave, and Benefits
301-1-100  Travel, Service Agreement, and Other Requirements
301-1-110  Documentation, Reporting, and Accountability

301-1-10 Purpose
This Instruction implements the Department of Health and Human Services (Department or HHS) policy, responsibilities, and procedures on overseas employment. 

When provisions of this policy differ from changes in applicable law or regulation, the changes in law or regulation apply.

301-1-20 Coverage and Exclusions
The provisions of this Instruction apply to the employment of all civilian employees in the Department of Health and Human Services (Department or HHS) Operating and Staff Divisions (OpDiv/StaffDiv) who work in overseas locations.
This Instruction does not apply to officers of the U.S. Public Health Service (PHS) Commissioned Corps or to federal contractors.
The provisions of this Instruction pertaining to conditions of employment of bargaining unit employees are fully negotiable in accordance with 5 U.S.C. Chapter 71 , and such actions require notification to labor organizations when impacted employees are bargaining unit employees.  When the provisions of this Instruction differ from the requirements contained in applicable collective bargaining agreement(s), the collective bargaining agreement takes precedence for bargaining unit employees.
301-1-30 References
5 United States Code (U.S.C.) §3343, Details to International Organizations
5 U.S.C. §§3581-3584, Reemployment After Service with An International Organization
5 U.S.C. Subchapter III (§§5921-5928), Overseas Differentials and Allowances
5 U.S.C. Chapter 63, Leave
22 U.S.C. §4081 et seq., Travel and related expenses (authorized for PHS by 42 U.S.C. §242l(c))
22 U.S.C. §4083, Required Leave (authorized for PHS by 42 U.S.C. §242l(c))
42 U.S.C. §242l(c), Benefits for Overseas Assignees 
5 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 8, Appointments to Overseas Positions
5 CFR Part 301, Subpart B, Overseas Limited Appointment
5 CFR Part 301, Subpart C, Overseas (Local Hire) Employees Eligible for Noncompetitive Appointment Upon Return to the U.S.
5 CFR §315.608, Noncompetitive Appointment of Certain Former Overseas Employees
5 CFR 352, Subpart C, Detail and Transfer of Federal Employees to International Organizations
5 CFR Part 630, Absence and Leave
HHS Instruction 300-3, Details and Intergovernmental Personnel Act (IPA) Assignments
HHS Instruction 590-1, Physician, Dentist, and Podiatrist Pay
HHS Travel Policy
Department of State Standardized Regulations (DSSR), overseas allowances and differentials under 5 U.S.C. §§5921-5925 and 5927
Memo from HHS Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources, Delegation of Human Resources Authorities, dated May 9, 2022.
301-1-40 Definitions
Days.  Calendar days.
Detail.  A temporary assignment to a different position for a specified period.  An employee who is on detail continues to occupy their official position of record while on detail and continues to receive pay and federal benefits associated with their permanent position.  At the expiration of the detail, the employee returns to his or her official position of record.  For complete information on details, see HHS Instruction 300-3, Details and IPA Assignments.
Overseas Location.  Unless otherwise specified in this policy, overseas locations include foreign countries and other areas outside the continental U.S., but does not include Alaska, Guam, Hawaii, the Isthmus of Panama, Puerto Rico, or the Virgin Islands (5 CFR §§8.1, 8.4, and 210.102(9)). 
Transfer.  
A change of position by an employee from HHS to an international organization (5 U.S.C. §3581 and 5 CFR 352, Subpart C), ormovement of an employee, without a break in service of one (1) full workday, from a position in one agency to a position in another agency (5 CFR §210.102(18)).  See also OPM.gov/Details and Transfers.  
For overseas allowances and differentials in Section 301-1-90, ‘transfer’ is defined by the Dept. of State as a change in an employee’s duty location within HHS via an appointment, reassignment or other staffing action listed in Section 301-1-80 (DSSR Chapters 040, 241 and 251).  By DSSR definition, this excludes external transfers described in (D)(1) above and details since neither staffing action changes an employee’s duty location within HHS.  However, except for employees who are otherwise excluded by this policy in Section 301-1-90, the DSSR authorizes employees on a detail may be eligible for some overseas payments:  post hardship differentials, danger pay, and compensatory time (DSSR Chapters 511, 651 and 811 respectively).
301-1-50 Responsibilities
Assistant Secretary for Administration, Office of Human Resources (ASA/OHR):
Establishes Department-wide HR policy and guidance in accordance with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Submit requests to OPM for approval of an exception to the time limit for an overseas limited appointment.
Reviews and gives concurrence/non-concurrence to the HHS Office of Global Affairs on OpDiv/StaffDiv exemption requests to HHS’ six (6) year single country tour of duty limit in accordance with this policy.
Periodically reviews OpDiv/StaffDiv internal HR guidance, procedures, forms, reports, etc. to assure conformance with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Office of Global Affairs (OGA):
Serves as HHS’ liaison with the Department of State on overseas employment, including the preparation and submission of reports requested by the Dept. of State.
Approves/disapproves OpDiv/StaffDiv exemption requests to HHS’ six (6) year single country tour of duty limit after coordinating HR Center requests with ASA/OHR at employmentpolicy@hhs.gov for concurrence.
Reviews and gives concurrence/non-concurrence on detail requests from the OpDiv/StaffDiv Head or written designee to international organizations via 5 CFR Part 352.
Requests concurrence from the HHS Secretary to request Secretary of State approval to extend a detail to an international organization beyond five (5) years, in cases where the extension is in the national interest.  If the HHS Secretary concurs, submits request to the Dept. of State for approval.
Requests Dept. of State approval for international organizations not currently on the Dept. of State’s approved organization list, at the request of the OpDiv/StaffDiv’s servicing HR Centers.
Annually reviews the Dept. of State Difficult to Staff Posts designated list.  Based on this review, notifies OpDivs/StaffDivs the posts eligible for annual Difficult to Staff Incentive Differential (DSID) by October of each year.  Difficult to Staff Incentive is also referred to as a Service Need Differential (SND).   
Reviews OpDiv/StaffDiv bi-annual overseas hiring plans.
Develops supplemental HHS-wide overseas employment guidance, if necessary, with signed approval by the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources/Chief Human Capital Officer (DASHR/CHCO) prior to release at employmentpolicy@hhs.gov.  Supplemental travel guidance is coordinated with the ASA/Program Support Center to ensure consistency with HHS travel policy.
OpDivs/StaffDivs in coordination with their Human Resources Centers (HR Centers):
Comply with this Instruction, any applicable HHS, Dept. of State, and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Ensure internal guidance or standard operating procedures on overseas employment adhere to HHS policy.
Obtain foreign country clearance from the Dept. of State prior to employee travel.
Ensure employees complete and sign a service agreement prior to authorized travel.
Request OGA concurrence on details to international organizations via 5 CFR §352, Subpart C, prior to the effective date.
Request Dept. of State approval, via OGA, to approve international organizations who are not on Dept. of State’s approved organization list for details and transfers under 5 CFR §352, Subpart C.
Submit requests to extend details to international organization beyond five consecutive (5) years to OGA for review and submission to the HHS Secretary for concurrence and the Secretary of State for approval.
Submit bi-annual overseas hiring plans to OGA no later than October 1 of each year at os-oga-hhs-globalstaffing@hhs.gov. 
Authorize and grant DSID/SND based on the Difficult to Staff Posts list provided by OGA annually under Section 301-1-50(B)(6) of this Instruction.  Base SND/DSID decisions on written justification for employee nominations and recommend the positions, occupational specialties, and/or posts at which specific employees/positions may be eligible to receive the SND/DSID.
301-1-60 Foreign Country Clearance
The Dept. of State must give permission for any U.S. government employee to be in a foreign country on official business.  Dept. of State clearance is required before an employee works overseas regardless of timeframe or type of appointment (full-time, part-time, temporary, etc.).  Clearance is required in advance of travel to an overseas duty location.
OpDivs/StaffDivs submit clearance requests via Dept. of State’s electronic Country Clearance (eCC) system and provide a copy to the HHS Office of Global Affairs (OGA) at OSPassports@hhs.gov .  Cables may be used in cases where the request is classified, in accordance with the Dept. of State’s Foreign Affairs Manual, Chief of Mission Authority, Security Responsibility and Overseas Staffing, June 10, 2020.
OpDiv/StaffDiv requests for eCC access and questions on current Dept. of State clearance procedures may be sent to OGA at OSPassports@hhs.gov. 
Clearance for HHS employees who are transferred to work for an international organization (via 5 CFR 352, Subpart C) are managed by the international organization, not HHS.
301-1-70 Tour of Duty
Tour of duty is up to 24 or 36 months, at the discretion of the OpDiv/StaffDiv; however, time limits are dependent on the hiring authority used to fill the overseas position.  For example, temporary appointments made under 5 CFR 316, Subpart D, are for periods not to exceed one (1) year, then may be extended up to a maximum of one (1) additional year (24 months total duration). 
Employees may serve up to a maximum of six (6) consecutive years in a single country.  However,  some hiring authorities have different time limits, e.g., Temporary and Term appointments (5 CFR Part 316); Overseas Limited appointments (5 CFR 301, Subpart B); and Details and Transfers to International Organizations (5 CFR §352.302), etc.  See Section 301-1-80.  
The tour of duty begins on the date of arrival at the overseas duty location (or the entrance on duty date when recruited overseas) and ends either at the expiration of appointment or on the day of departure (5 CFR §630.603).
When computing overseas service, the following are included: 1) authorized leave with pay; 2) absence in a non-pay status up to a maximum of two (2) workweeks within each 12 months of service; 3) time spent in the U.S. Armed Forces; and 4) details (5 CFR §630.603).
Tour of duty may be shortened by the employee or the employing OpDiv/StaffDiv (conditions are covered in the service agreement; e.g., by mutual agreement, with 30 days advance notice, etc.)   Details to international organizations (5 CFR Part 352) may be terminated, at the discretion of the loaning or gaining organization, prior to the documented NTE date.
Tour of duty may be extended by the employing OpDiv/StaffDiv up to 120 days for administrative purposes, as long as the time limits of the hiring authority used to fill the overseas position are not exceeded.
An exemption to the six (6) year single country limit requires prior approval by the Director, Office of Global Affairs (OGA), with concurrence by the HHS DASHR/CHCO.  Requests are sent to OGA at os-oga-hhs-globalstaffing@hhs.gov at least six (6) months prior to the last day of the current tour. 
Changes to the tour of duty are annotated on the service agreement and signed by all parties (employee, supervisor, loaning and gaining organizations for details).  See also Section 301-1-100.
301-1-80 Recruitment and Staffing
Prior to filling overseas positions, the Career Transition Assistance Program (CTAP), Interagency Career Transition Assistance Program (ICTAP), the HHS Reemployment Priority List (RPL) and/or the HHS Priority Reemployment List (PRL) must be cleared unless the staffing action is one of the exceptions listed in the Appendices of HHS Instruction 330-2, Priority Placement Programs (5 CFR Part 302 and 5 CFR §§330.211, 330.609, 330.707).
HHS overseas positions can be filled by a time-limited appointment via one of the following staffing methods:
Competitive examining, merit promotion, direct hire authority, temporary or term employment, or excepted service recruitment (5 CFR §8.1), following the rules of the applicable hiring authority. 

Actions are processed according to the type of appointment, see OPM Guide to Processing Personnel Actions (GPPA), Chapter 9, Career and Career-Conditional Appts; Chapter 11, Excepted Service Appts; or Chapter 10, Non-status Appts in the Competitive Service (temporary/term, etc.). 
Title 42 hiring authority (i.e., 42 U.S.C. §§209 (f) or (g); 42 U.S.C. 237; or an OpDiv/StaffDiv-specific Title 42 hiring authority, following HHS Instructions 42-1, 42-2, or 42-3 as applicable).  Before using an OpDiv/StaffDiv-specific Title 42 authority to fill an overseas position, HR Centers should review the language of their Division’s Title 42 hiring authority and/or consult their legal counsel to ensure such use is legally supportable. 

Use Nature of Action Code ZLM and cite the applicable Title 42 legal authority when processing actions (see OPM GPPA, Chapter 11, Excepted Service Appts).
Discretionary actions listed under an HR Center’s merit promotion plan (5 CFR §335.103(c)(3)).  When an OpDiv/StaffDiv has a documented Merit Promotion (MP) Plan that includes the requirements listed under 5 CFR §335.103 and has identified the discretionary action(s) under 5 CFR 335.103(c)((3) in its MP plan, an OpDiv/StaffDiv may:
Promote, reassign, demote, transfer, reinstate, or detail an employee to an overseas position that has no greater promotion potential than the employee holds or previously held on a permanent basis in the competitive service;
Temporarily promote or detail an employee to higher graded position or a position with a higher promotion potential for 120 days or less; etc.
See OPM GPPA, Chapter 14, Promotions, Changes to Lower Grades, Reassignments, Details, etc. when processing actions.  Details must adhere to the requirements in HHS Instruction 300-3, Details and IPA Assignments.
Time-Limited Promotion to fill temporary positions for a specified period not more than five (5) years, in accordance with 5 CFR §335.102, when (a) and (b) immediately below are met.
OpDivs/StaffDivs must give an employee advance written notice of the conditions of the time-limited promotion, including: 1) the time limit; 2) reason for time limit; 3) the requirement for competition for promotion beyond 120 days if applicable (see (b) immediately below); 4) the employee may be returned to the position from which temporarily promoted (or to a position of equivalent grade and pay) at any time; and 5) the return is not subject to reduction in force (RIF), performance or adverse action or grievance procedures (5 CFR §335.102(f)(1)).
Competition for a time-limited promotion over 120 days is required unless:
the time-limited promotion is made under competitive procedures and the job opportunity announcement stated the temporary promotion may be made permanent (5 CFR §335.103(c)(1)(i)); or
the employee previously held the proposed grade level on a permanent basis in the competitive service (5 CFR §335.103(c)(3)(iv) or (v)).
Use OPM GPPA, Chapter 14, Promotions, Changes to Lower Grades, Reassignments, Details, etc. when processing actions.
Overseas Limited Appointment (5 CFR §§8.2 and 301, Subpart B).
An overseas limited appointment may be given to a U.S. citizen previously recruited overseas for a position overseas if a competitive examining job announcement open to applicants in the local overseas area results in a shortage of eligible applicants (defined by 5 CFR §337.202(b)).

OR
An overseas limited appointment may be given to a U.S. citizen recruited outside an overseas area when an HR Center determines that unusual or emergency conditions exist that make it not possible or impracticable to appoint from a register (5 CFR §§8.2 and 301.202). 
Time Limits.  Overseas limited appointments are an indefinite duration, unless otherwise limited (5 CFR §301.203):
OpDiv/StaffDivs can limit overseas term appointments to five (5) years maximum, as part of a documented overseas rotation program for career/career-conditional employees, or
OpDiv/StaffDivs can make overseas limited appointments for one (1) year or less (which may be extended for up to a maximum of one (1) additional year, or 24 months total duration) to meet administrative needs.
OPM may approve an exception to the time limits in (c)(i) and (ii) based on an HHS HQ-level request (HR Centers send requests to ASA/OHR at employmentpolicy@hhs.gov).
Overseas limited appointments of an indefinite duration are exempt by regulation (5 CFR 301.203) from the HHS tour of duty limits in Section 301-1-70 (A-B). 
Other requirements (5 CFR §§8.2, and 301.204-206):
Candidates must meet OPM’s qualification requirements for the position;
Time in grade applies to overseas limited appointments;
Employees are eligible for within-grade increases;
Employees are not eligible for federal retirement, unless eligible through continuity of service or length of appointment;
Overseas limited employees must serve a one (1) year trial period and may be terminated at any time during their trial period after the advance notice requirements described in 5 CFR 315.804 and 805 are met.  Prior service may be creditable towards completion of a trial period, in accordance with HHS Instruction 315-1, Probationary and Trial Periods.
Employees do not acquire competitive status based on their overseas limited appointment; however, an employee who has competitive status on the basis of a previous non-temporary competitive service appointment, retains status and may continue to compete for positions open to ‘status’ candidates. (Such employees should be advised to
provide a SF-50 showing they previously held a non-temporary competitive service position when applying to jobs.)
Use NOAC HNM, HRM, or H3M and cite Reg 301.201 or 301.202 when processing overseas limited appointment actions (see OPM GPPA, Chapter 10, Non-Status Appointments).
Detail or Transfer to an International Organization.  See Section 301-1-40 for definitions.
Detail.  OpDiv/StaffDiv Heads or written designee may authorize the detail of eligible employees (defined in (6)(d) below) only to international organizations approved by the Dept. of State (5 CFR §352.304), with the concurrence of OGA, prior to the effective date of the detail.  Requests are submitted to OGA by the servicing HR Center at os-oga-hhs-globalstaffing@hhs.gov. 
Transfer.  Upon the written request by an international organization for an employee’s services, an OpDiv/StaffDiv Head or written designee may authorize the transfer of eligible employees (defined in (6)(d) below) to international organizations approved by the Dept. of State (5 CFR §§352.304 and 308), with the concurrence of the OGA prior to the effective date.  Requests are submitted to OGA by the servicing HR Center at os-oga-hhs-globalstaffing@hhs.gov.  A letter of consent with the effective date mutually agreed by the international organization and the employing OpDiv/StaffDiv is provided to the organization with a copy to the employee (5 CFR §352.308(b-c)). 
Eligible international organizations approved by Dept. of State for details and transfers under 5 CFR Part 352, Subpart C, are at https://iocareers.state.gov/Main/Content/Page/approved-international-organizations.  Requests to obtain Dept. of State approval for organizations not on approved list, should be sent to OGA at os-oga-hhs-globalstaffing@hhs.gov.
Eligible Employees.  All employees are eligible except the employees listed under 5 CFR §§352.305 and 307, i.e., a person serving on a temporary appointment; a seasonal, intermittent, or part-time appointment; a non-career, limited emergency, or limited term appointment in the Senior Executive Service (SES); a Presidential appointment; or a Schedule C appointment.
Time Limits (5 U.S.C. §§3343, 5 CFR §§352.302 and 352.308).
Employees who are detailed or transferred to international organizations may serve on those assignments for up to five (5) consecutive years. 
The Secretary of State, upon the recommendation of the Secretary of HHS, may approve an extension up to three (3) additional years if the extension is in the national interest.  Extension requests are submitted by the HR Center to OGA at os-oga-hhs-globalstaffing@hhs.gov, no later than three (3) months before the expiration of the current detail, and must include a justification why the extension request is needed; the extension request from the international organization; and the finance agreement between the OpDiv/StaffDiv and the international organization (see HHS Instruction, 300-3, Details and IPA Assignments, Reimbursable and Non-reimbursable Agreements).
Employees cannot serve longer than a total of eight (8) years on details or transfers to international organizations (or a combination of details and transfers) during their entire federal career. 
HHS employees remain in their official HHS position of record while on a detail to international organization and return to their official position of record at the expiration of the detail.  See Section 301-1-40 for definition.
HHS employees who are transferred to an international organization are entitled to retain coverage to their federal employee health benefits, retirement, and life insurance plans, and can elect to retain credit for accumulated leave at the time of transfer, in accordance with 5 U.S.C. §3582(a) and (c).  Agency retirement and insurance contributions continue while the employee is transferred, as long as employee contributions continue (5 U.S.C. §3582(d)).  Employee and agency contributions to the Thrift Savings Plan (TSP) stop after separation, but make-up contributions are allowed in certain circumstances, see (C)(5) below.
Documentation.
Details are documented in accordance with HHS Instruction 300-3, Details and IPA Assignments, Section 300-3-90.
Transfers are documented in accordance with 5 CFR §352.308:
A letter of consent with an effective date mutually agreed by the international organization and the employing OpDiv/StaffDiv is provided to the organization with a copy to the employee;
A leave statement showing the employee’s annual and sick leave balances at the time of transfer is provided to the employee;
The notice of personnel action effecting the separation action must identify the international organization which the employee is transferring to; the period which the employee has reemployment rights (see (C)(5) in this Section below); and instructions for reemployment.
Details to international organizations may be reimbursable or non-reimbursable, in accordance with 5 U.S.C. §3343(d-e).  Financial agreements must adhere to the legal and regulatory requirements described in HHS Instruction 300-3, Details and IPA Assignments.
Transfers to international organizations are non-reimbursable, except agency retirement and insurance contributions outlined above.
Employees may submit an appeal to the Merit System Protection Board (MSPB) alleging an OpDiv/StaffDiv’s failure to comply with any of the provisions of 5 U.S.C. §§3343, 3581-3584 or of 5 CFR Part 352.
Recruitment of Non-U.S. Citizens via 5 CFR §8.3.  Non-U.S. citizens may be recruited overseas for a Title 5 excepted service position overseas.  The citizenship requirement for federal employment (Executive Order 11935), and the Consolidated Appropriations Act ban on payment of funds to non-U.S. citizens, do not apply to federal positions outside the continental U.S. 

Use NOAC BPM and cite 5 CFR §8.3 when processing actions (see OPM GPPA, Chapter 11, Excepted Service Appointments).
Employment After the Expiration of an Overseas Assignment.
With the exception of Details and Transfers to International Organizations (see (4) and (5) immediately below), HHS employees serving overseas are not entitled to continuation of employment after the expiration of their time-limited overseas assignment (see Section 301-1-70, Tour of Duty). 
Employees serving in overseas positions must compete for a vacancy in the U.S. via competitive examining, merit promotion, direct hire authority, excepted service recruitment, etc. following the rules of the applicable job opportunity announcement/hiring authority.  (See the citizenship requirement (7) at bottom of this Section.)
OpDivs/StaffDivs may at their discretion include a commitment in an employee’s service agreement to reassign or promote the employee after their overseas assignment ends to a competitive service position within their employing OpDiv/StaffDiv that has no greater promotion potential than the employee holds or previously held within the competitive service on a permanent basis. 
This option is available when the Division’s servicing HR Center has a documented Merit Promotion (MP) Plan in place that includes the requirements listed under 5 CFR §335.103 and has identified such reassignments and/or promotions as discretionary actions in its MP plan.  See also discretionary actions under (B)(3) above. 
This option is not available for employees serving on either a temporary or term overseas appointment under 5 CFR Part 316 and the employee has not previously held a permanent competitive service position prior to accepting the temporary or term overseas appointment.  Employees do not acquire competitive service status based on a temporary or term appointment and these time-limited appointments end automatically at the expiration date.  Such employees need to compete for a vacancy and be selected prior to their expiration date to avoid separation or a break in service.
This option is not available for employees serving on an excepted service, SES, or Scientific or Senior Level (ST/SL) overseas position and the employee has not previously held a competitive service position on a permanent basis.  If the employee has previously held a competitive service position on a permanent basis, they can be placed via merit promotion procedures into a competitive service position that has no greater promotion potential than the employee previously held on a permanent basis in the competitive service.  Prior to placement, HR Centers must verify status via a SF-50 showing the employee previously held a competitive service position on a permanent basis.
Details to International Organizations (5 U.S.C. §3443), see (B)(6) above.  Employees remain in their official HHS position of record while on a detail to an international organization and return to their official position of record at the expiration of the detail, see Section 301-1-40 for definition.
Transfers to International Organizations (5 U.S.C. §§3581-3584), see also (B)(6) above.  Employees who are transferred to international organizations approved by the Dept. of State are entitled to reemployment after their employment with the international organization ends either to their former HHS position or to a position of like seniority, status and pay within their former employing OpDiv/StaffDiv (5 U.S.C. §§3581-3584 and 5 CFR §§352.311-313):
The employee must apply for reemployment no later than 90 days after separation from the international organization;
The separation is either voluntarily or involuntarily, without cause; and
The international transfer must not exceed the time limits described under (B)(6)(e) above.
If (a)-(c) immediately above are met, the former employee must be reemployed within 30 days of receiving the former employee’s reemployment application.  (If the former employee applies before separation from the international organization, the 30-day period begins either on the date of application, or 30 days before the separation date from the international organization, whichever is later.)
The application must be in writing, in any format of the HR Center’s choosing.  The international organization’s separation notice must be included.
Reemployment instructions for former SES employees can be found at 5 CFR §352.311(c).
Upon reemployment, the employee is entitled to the rate of basic pay which the employee would have been entitled had the employee remained with the employing agency; and
The employee is entitled to restoration of any sick leave.
An employee who elected to retain federal retirement coverage and continued to make all required employee contributions while employed with the international organization, may make make-up contributions to the TSP which were missed due to federal separation.  The employee also receives make-up agency contributions and lost earnings on the agency contributions, consistent with the TSP rules. 
The period between separation and reemployment is creditable service for all employment purposes.  
If the OpDiv/StaffDiv fails to reemploy their former employee within 30 days of receiving their application, the servicing HR Center must notify the employee, in writing, of the reasons and their right to appeal to the MSPB.  The HR Center must follow the notice of appeal rights procedures under 5 CFR §1201.21.
If the OpDiv/StaffDiv fails to reach and issue a decision to the employee within 30 days of receiving their application, the former employee is entitled to appeal the OpDiv/StaffDiv’s failure to issue a reemployment decision to the MSPB.
Non-competitive appointment for family members of certain overseas employees upon return to the U.S. (5 CFR Part 301, Subpart C, and §315.608).
An HHS employee’s family member who has served of creditable overseas service (as defined in 5 CFR §315.608(b)) may be eligible to be noncompetitively appointed to a competitive service position in the U.S. (including Guam, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands) at any series or grade the family member is qualified for. 
The overseas position in which the family member served must have been recruited overseas among people residing in the overseas area and must have been non-permanent;
The family member received a performance rating of fully successful or higher;
The family member must have lived in an overseas area at the time of the HHS employee’s overseas appointment;
The family member is eligible for three (3) years from the date of return to the U.S. to reside (may be extended for specific reasons listed under 5 CFR §315.608(d)); and
The family member must meet all appointment criteria, such as U.S. citizenship.
For definitions, including family member and creditable overseas service, see 5 CFR §315.608.
Citizenship.  Individuals who are not U.S. citizens or nationals cannot be appointed to competitive service positions within the U.S. (Executive Order 11935).  In addition, the Consolidated Appropriations Act (i.e., the annual federal budget) contains a government-wide prohibition on compensating individuals who are not U.S. citizens or nationals for any federal position within the U.S., unless the agency has a statutory exemption to the ban.  Within HHS, only 42 U.S.C. §209(h) permits hiring non-U.S. citizens as Special Consultants (42 U.S.C §209(f)) or Service Fellows (42 U.S.C. §209(g)) to positions within the U.S. without regard to the appropriations ban.  There are not similar restrictions to appointing or compensating non-U.S. citizens to positions outside the U.S.; however, with the exception of employees hired under 42 U.S.C §§209(f) or (g), HHS has no legal authority to pay non-U.S. citizens the allowances and differentials under 5 U.S.C. §§5923-5928 (5 U.S.C. §5922), see Section 301-1-90 for additional information.  Consult the Office of the General Counsel with any questions.
301-1-90 Pay, Leave, and Benefits
Classification and Pay.  HHS employees in a position with an overseas duty location are covered by the classification and pay administration rules under Title 5 (5 U.S.C. Chapters 51, 53, and 55, and 5 CFR Parts 511 and 550), except for:
Comparability Pay.  In lieu of locality-based pay,overseas employees excluding Title 38 physicians (series 602), podiatrists (series 668), and dentists (series 680), receive comparability pay in addition to base pay that is calculated as 2/3 of the Washington, D.C. locality pay rate.  Rate is limited to the Executive Schedule Level IV rate.  Basic pay is used in calculating overseas allowances.  (Public Law (P.L.) 114-113 §212(3); P.L. 114-223 Div. C; P.L. 114-254 Div. A §101(1))  HHS annual overseas pay comparability tables are located at https://intranet.hhs.gov/hr/policy.
Physician, Dentist and Podiatrist Pay (PDP).  Physicians (series 602), podiatrists (series 668),and dentists (series 680) are eligible for Title 38 market pay, in accordance with HHS Instruction 590-1, Physician, Dentist, and Podiatrist Pay.  Market pay is a component of annual pay intended to reflect the recruitment and retention needs for the specialty or assignment of a particular HHS physician.  Employees who receive market pay are also eligible for overseas allowances, with the exception of any premium pay (including compensatory time).  Overseas allowances are computed based upon applicable percentage of the employee’s GS base pay plus market pay.  In no case may the total amount of compensation paid to a physician, podiatrist, or dentist exceed the amount of annual compensation of the President of the United States (3 U.S.C. §102).
Allowances and Differentials (5 U.S.C. §5913, 5922-5928 and the Dept. of State Regulations (DSSR).  See also the definition of transfer in this policy, Section 301-1-40). 

The Executive Orders listed in the DSSR (Chapter 010) give the Dept. of State authority to prescribe regulations on the allotment of funds under 5 U.S.C. §5913, and allowances and differentials under 5 U.S.C. §§5921-5928 for federal employees working in a foreign area.  (OPM regulations for non-foreign areas are at 5 CFR Part 591, Subpart B.)  HR Centers should direct questions concerning the DSSR to the Office of Global Affairs at os-oga-hhs-globalstaffing@hhs.gov.

HHS employees who are U.S. citizens and work in a foreign area (defined under 5 U.S.C. §5921(6) and DSSR Chapter 040(f) and (i)) may be eligible for the following the allowances and differentials. 

HHS exception to U.S. citizen requirement:  Non-U.S. citizens hired via 42 U.S.C. §§209(f) or (g) and work in a foreign area defined under 5 U.S.C. §5921(6) may also be eligible for the following allowances and differentials (42 U.S.C. §209(h) and 40 Comp. Gen. 628 (May 18, 1961)).  See also Section 301-1-80, Citizenship.
Quarters allowances described under 5 U.S.C. §5923 when Government owned or rented quarters are not provided without charge (see also DSSR Chapter 100);
Cost-of-Living Allowances under 5 U.S.C. §5924 when applicable (see also DSSR Chapter 200);
Post hardship differential(s) based on environmental conditions described under 5 U.S.C. §5925 and the requirements described in DSSR Chapter 500;
Difficult to Staff Incentive Differential (DSID), also referred to as a Service Need Differential (SND).  It may be granted to an employee assigned to a foreign post which is authorized by the Dept. of State for a 15%, 20%, 25%, 30% or 35% post hardship differential, after it is determined that especially adverse environmental conditions warrant additional pay as an incentive to fill the employee's position at that post.  It may be granted at the time of a second or subsequent tour in a DSID/SND designated post.  Justifications must be made in writing.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Head or written designee may authorize the payment up to an additional 15%  over basic compensation to an employee assigned to a foreign post designated by the Dept. of State for a DSID.
If the post for which the DSID is authorized is also authorized for Danger Pay Allowance ((7) immediately below), the combination of the Danger Pay Allowance and the DSID may not exceed 35% of the basic compensation.
Should post hardship differential fall below the 15% requirement, the employee will continue to receive DSID until the end of his or her tour of duty or permanent departure from the post.
Only employees who are eligible to receive post hardship differential as defined in DSSR Chapter 500 may receive DSID.
Authorizing and certifying officials approve payment of an employee’s SND/DSID allowance upon submission by the employee of a properly executed SF-1190 and confirmation by the authorizing official that payment is appropriate.
Compensatory time at certain foreign areas described under 5 U.S.C. §5926 (see also DSSR Chapter 800), excluding employees in positions listed in (A)(2) immediately above;
Advances in pay described under 5 U.S.C. §5927(a)(1-2) (see also DSSR Chapter 850); and
Danger pay allowance under 5 U.S.C. §5928 when applicable (see also DSSR Chapter 650). 
Official residence expenses under 5 U.S.C. §5913 may be paid to an HHS senior official who is  working in a foreign country and who has been designated by the Secretary of State as occupying a position of such importance that the Government should defray the unusual expenses incident to the operation and maintenance of his/her official residence and the HHS Secretary has determined the overseas residence as an official residence in accordance with the DSSR Chapter 400.
Leave.  HHS employees in a position with an overseas duty location are covered by the leave rules under 5 U.S.C. Chapter 63,  5 CFR Part 630, and HHS Instruction 630-1, Leave and Excused Absence - PDF.  Employees are eligible for home leave when they have completed 24 months of continuous service outside the U.S. in accordance with the rules described under 5 CFR 630, Subpart F.
Leave of Absence.  Public Health Service (PHS) employees on appointments with an overseas duty location may be required by their OpDiv/StaffDiv Head or written designee to take a leave of absence upon completion of 12 months of continuous overseas service, and PHS employees shall be required to take a leave of absence as soon as possible after completion of three (3) years of continuous overseas service as described under 22 U.S.C. §4083 (42 U.S.C. §242l(c)).  In accordance with 22 U.S.C. §4083, employees may take the required leave anywhere in the U.S. or its territories, including American Samoa, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and the U.S. Virgin Islands; or in cases where the employee is working at an unaccompanied overseas location, at home where their family resides (22 U.S.C. §4083(b)).  While on a leave of absence, the employee may be required to work, but such time is not counted as leave (22 U.S.C. §4083(c)). (For the purposes of this policy, ‘Department’ is defined as HHS, and ‘member of the Service’ is a PHS employee under 22 U.S.C. §4083.)
Benefits.  There is no impact on federal benefits (life and health insurance, retirement, Flexible Spending Accounts, Long Term Care Insurance, etc.) when a permanent HHS employee accepts a position with an overseas duty location.  Overseas employees who are U.S. citizens or nationals are eligible for all federal civil service benefits; however, benefits available to employees on time-limited appointments may vary depending on length of appointment.  Employees and HR staff should consult their servicing HR benefits officer with any questions.      
Medical evacuation and hospitalization coverage for overseas employees is explained in the ASA/Program Support Center’s HHS Travel Policy under International Requirements.
Workplace Flexibilities.  Employees who are working in an overseas location may be eligible for workplace flexibilities (e.g., telework, alternate work schedules, etc.) in accordance with HHS Instruction 990-1, Workplace Flexibilities. 
301-1-100 Travel, Service Agreement, and Other Requirements
Employees appointed to a position with an overseas duty location must sign a service agreement prior to departure or extension for a period equal to the length of the overseas assignment or be required to reimburse their employing OpDiv/StaffDiv for the cost of the assignment (e.g., travel, relocation, and per diem expenses, not including salary and benefits) if the employee does not fulfill the service agreement.  The OpDiv/StaffDiv Head or written designee, in accordance with the HHS Delegation of HR Authorities, may waive this reimbursement and reason(s) must be documented.
Reimbursement of travel expenses for moves to/from an overseas assignment, including rates of per diem for employees and dependents, shipment of household effects, temporary duty allowances, etc. is paid in accordance with the HHS Travel Policy.  Travel and transportation questions should be directed to the ASA/Program Support Center. 
OpDivs/StaffDivs must follow the HHS Travel Policy for international travel requirements, including Passports; Visas; medical clearance and immunizations; completion of HHS Office of National Security safety/security briefings, and Dept. of State Foreign Service Institute training; overseas tour renewal travel (i.e., return home), etc. 
Public Health Service (PHS) employees working overseas are additionally authorized by 42 U.S.C. §242l(c) the following travel allowances and related expenses given to Dept. of State Foreign Service employees under 22 U.S.C. §§4081 and 4082.  (For the purposes of this policy, ‘Department’ is defined as HHS; ‘member of the Service’ is a PHS employee; and ‘Foreign Service post’ is an overseas duty location under 22 U.S.C. §§4081-82.)
Travel and Related Expenses.  In addition to the travel and related expenses authorized by the HHS Travel Policy, OpDiv/StaffDiv Heads or written designee may authorize the payment of costs and expenses listed under 22 U.S.C. §4081 incurred by PHS employees and their families. 
Basic Household Furnishings.  OpDiv/StaffDiv Heads or written designee may loan PHS employees on appointments with an overseas duty location basic household furnishings and equipment for use in personally owned or leased residences (22 U.S.C. §4082).
HHS employees on an overseas assignment are subject to the applicable ethics statutes and regulations including:  18 U.S.C. §§ 201-227  – Criminal Conflicts of Interest; 5 U.S.C. app.  – Ethics in Government Act of 1978; 5 U.S.C. §§ 7321-7326  and 5 CFR Part 734 – Hatch Act and implementing Political Activities Regulation; 5 U.S.C. § 7342  – Foreign Gifts and Decorations Act; 5 U.S.C. § 7353  – Gifts to Federal Employees; 41 U.S.C. §§ 2101-2107  – Ethics provisions of the Procurement Integrity Act; 5 CFR Part 735 – Employee Responsibilities and Conduct; 5 CFR Part 2634 – Executive Branch Financial Disclosure and Related Requirements; 5 CFR Part 2635 – Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive Branch; 5 CFR Part 5501 – HHS Supplemental Standards of Ethical Conduct; and 5 CFR Part 5502 – HHS Supplemental Financial Disclosure Reporting Requirements. 

The servicing ethics office of the employing OpDiv/StaffDiv is responsible for communicating these requirements to their employee.  Questions should be directed to the servicing Deputy Ethics Counselor and/or Ethics Coordinator, a list of whom can be found at: /about/agencies/ogc/contact-ogc/agency-deputy-ethics-counselors-and-ethics-coordinators/index.html.
Employees are subject to the provisions of 5 U.S.C. Chapter 73, which regulates employee suitability, security, and conduct, including restrictions on political activity, and agency standards of conduct regulations.
HHS employees must also follow the Dept. of State Chief of Mission security policies when working overseas.  See Dept. of State’s Foreign Affairs Manual, Chief of Mission Authority, Security Responsibility and Overseas Staffing, June 10, 2020 for additional information.
301-1-110 Documentation, Reporting, and Accountability
Records associated with personnel actions, including service agreements, and all documentation sufficient for third party reconstruction purposes, must be retained according to the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) schedule.  Generally, all records created in a given year must be retained for a total of three (3) full years.  Records involved in litigation and grievance processes may be destroyed only after official notification is received from OPM, Department of Justice, courts, or the Office of the General Counsel, etc. that the matter has been fully litigated, or resolved and closed.
OpDivs/StaffDivs submit bi-annual overseas hiring plans to the Office of Global Affairs (OGA) no later than October 1 of each year at os-oga-hhs-globalstaffing@hhs.gov.  Questions concerning this reporting requirement should be directed to the OGA.
ASA/OHR may conduct periodic accountability reviews to analyze compliance with this Instruction, HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and applicable federal laws and regulations.






















302-1
Instruction 302-1: Employment in the Excepted Service
Issuance Date: 10/30/2020

Material Transmitted:
HHS Instruction 302-1, Employment in the Excepted Service dated 10/30/2020.

Material Superseded:
HHS Instruction 302-1, Employment in the Excepted Service dated 04/08/2020.

Background:
This Instruction has been revised to comply with regulatory changes to 5 CFR Part 302, published on November 6, 2020.

This policy is effective immediately and must be carried out in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, bargaining agreements, and Departmental policy.

/s/

J. Blair Duncan
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources
Chief Human Capital Officer

Subject: Employment in the Excepted Service
302-1-00 Purpose
302-1-10 References
302-1-20 Coverage and Exclusions
302-1-30 Definitions
302-1-40 Responsibilities
302-1-50 General
302-1-60 Classification, Qualifications & Recruitment
302-1-70 Priority Consideration Candidates
302-1-80 Assessment and Selection Procedures
302-1-90 Other Actions And Appointment Time Limits
302-1-100 Appeals
302-1-110 Personnel Actions
302-1-120 Documentation and Accountability

302-1-00 Purpose
This Instruction sets forth policy requirements relating to employment in the excepted service and applies to excepted positions that are subject to the provisions of Title 5, United States Code (U.S.C.), or subject to a statutory requirement to follow the veterans’ preference provisions of Title 5.

When provisions of this policy differ from changes in applicable law or regulation, the changes in law or regulation apply.

302-1-10 References
5 U.S.C §2103, The excepted service
5 U.S.C §2108, Veteran; disabled veteran; preference eligible
5 U.S.C §2301, Merit system principles
5 U.S.C §3320, Excepted service; government of the District of Columbia; selection
5 U.S.C §7511(a)(1)(B)-(C), Employee definition for Adverse Actions
5 U.S.C §8101(1), Employee definition for Compensation for Work Injuries
5 CFR Part 6, Exceptions from the Competitive Service (Rule VI)
5 CFR Part 211, Veteran Preference
5 CFR Part 213, Excepted Service
5 CFR §300.301, Details of Employees
5 CFR Part 302, Employment in the Excepted Service
5 CFR Part 362, Pathways Programs
Office of Personnel Management (OPM), Vet Guide, Veterans’ Preference in Appointments, Excepted Service Employment
HHS Instruction, 300-3, Details and IPA Agreements
HHS Instruction, 330-2, Priority Placement Programs
302-1-20 Coverage and Exclusions
A. Coverage

This Instruction covers all excepted positions that are subject to the provisions of Title 5, or subject to a statutory requirement to follow the veterans’ preference provisions of Title 5, including:

Positions filled via government-wide Schedule A and B authorities, unless 5 CFR §302.101(c)  exempts the specific Schedule A or B positions from 5 CFR Part 302 appointment procedures.
Positions filled via HHS-specific Schedule A and Schedule B authorities, unless OPM exempts in writing the Schedule A or B authority from 5 CFR Part 302 appointment procedures at the time of approval.
Positions filled under Schedule D, Pathways Programs (5 CFR §362.105(c)(2)).
B. Exclusions

Positions or appointments that are required by the Congress to be confirmed by, or made with the advice and consent of, the Senate (5 CFR §302.101(b) ).
Positions exempt from the 5 CFR Part 302 appointment procedures when the positions are specifically listed under 5 CFR §302.101(c) . Operating Divisions/Staff Divisions (OpDiv/StaffDiv, or Division) must develop written hiring procedures for such positions and apply them uniformly in accordance with the requirements under 5 CFR §302.101(c) , the merit system principles, and applicable HHS guidance. OpDivs/StaffDivs should consult their legal counsel on their internal procedures prior to implementation to ensure they are legally supportable and not in conflict with current case law, rule, law, regulation, or other legal authority.
Non-Title 5 excepted authorities, if the authority’s provisions specifically exempt the positions from Title 5 in part (i.e., appointment or hiring procedures), or completely (i.e., all Title 5 provisions).
C. Bargaining Unit Employees

The provisions of this Instruction pertaining to conditions of employment of bargaining unit employees (e.g., the filling of a position within the scope of the bargaining unit, promotion and reassignments, and adverse actions) are fully negotiable in accordance with 5 U.S.C. Chapter 71 . Therefore, when the provisions of this Instruction differ from the requirements contained in applicable collective bargaining agreement(s), the collective bargaining agreement takes precedence for bargaining unit employees.

302-1-30 Definitions
Excepted position. A position in the excepted service.
Excepted Service. Positions not in the competitive service or the Senior Executive Service; includes all positions in the Executive Branch of the Federal Government which are specifically excepted from the requirements of the competitive service by statute, Executive Order, or by OPM regulation.
Preference Eligible. Veterans who are disabled or who served on active duty in the Armed Forces during certain specified periods or in military campaigns, veterans discharged due to sole survivorship, or family members entitled to derived preference. Preference eligible candidates are generally entitled to preference over non-veterans for new appointments in both the competitive and excepted service and in retention during a reduction in force (5U.S.C §2108 ).
Priority Reemployment List (PRL). A list executive agencies must establish to give reemployment consideration and placement assistance to former HHS excepted service employees who have been furloughed or separated by RIF or compensable injury; or who appealed an adverse action to the Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB) and was found to have been unjustifiably dismissed from the agency but is not entitled to immediate restoration under the MSPB’s decision (5 CFR §302.303).
Reemployment List (RL). A discretionary executive agency list to give employment consideration to current and former HHS excepted service employees who are not eligible for inclusion on the HHS PRL. A RL is discretionary under 5 CFR §302.303(c)  and is not established by HHS.
302-1-40 Responsibilities
A. HHS Assistant Secretary for Administration, Office of Human Resources (HHS OHR):

Develops Department-wide policy and guidance regarding excepted service employment consistent with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations;
Submits requests to OPM for pass over and objections that require OPM approval;
Submits requests to OPM for approval to detail an excepted service employee, covered under 5 CFR §300.301(c) , to the competitive service; and
Periodically reviews OpDiv/StaffDiv excepted service procedures, actions, qualification standards, and reports to assure conformance with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
B. OpDiv/StaffDiv Human Resources Centers (HR Centers):

Comply with this Instruction, HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations;
Establish written procedures regarding the acceptance, rating and ranking, and selection of applications, as required by 5 CFR §§302.301 and 302.302(a) and this Instruction, ensuring procedures are applied uniformly and excepted service positions are filled in accordance with the merit system principles and veterans’ preference laws and regulations;
Ensure that applicants are notified of excepted service vacancies so that applicants have a reasonable opportunity to apply. If job opportunity announcements (JOAs) are used, include a reasonable accommodation statement (5 CFR §302.106 );
Document reasons to use ranked or unranked evaluation procedures and make such information available to an applicant upon his or her request (5 CFR §302.302(a));
Ensure that pass over/objection requests that require OPM approval are submitted to HHS OHR for review/concurrence and submission to OPM;
Approve or deny pass over/objection requests that do not require OPM approval, and provide to HHS OHR, upon request, a periodic report of all actions taken. This approval may not be redelegated below the OpDiv/StaffDiv Human Resources (HR) Director level;
Ensure reasons are documented for non-selection of a veteran preference or priority consideration eligible;
Ensure eligible former excepted service employees are entered on HHS’s PRL via HHS’ web-based system identified for this purpose; and the HHS PRL is checked for qualified candidates prior to filling excepted service positions, in accordance with this Instruction, HHS Instruction 330-2, Priority Placement Programs, and 5 CFR §302.304(a).
Ensure that requests to detail excepted service employees to the competitive service, who are covered by 5 CFR §300.301(c) , are forwarded to HHS OHR for review/concurrence and submission to OPM in accordance with HHS Instruction 300-3, Details and IPA Assignments;
Obtain a written statement from a non-temporary competitive service candidate acknowledging that s(he) is voluntarily leaving the competitive service to accept the position in the excepted service (5 CFR §302.102(b) ); and
Maintain documentation related to each recruitment when filling excepted service positions so recruitment actions can be reconstructed by a third party.
302-1-50 General
Excepted service positions are authorized by law or statute, by the President via Executive Order (E.O.), or by OPM regulation (i.e., Schedules A, B, C, or D). Government-wide excepted authorities/positions approved by OPM are described under 5 CFR Part 213.
Excepted service positions may or may not be subject to the provisions of Title 5. Unless the authority (i.e., law/statute, E.O. or OPM approval/regulations) provisions specifically exempt the positions from Title 5 appointment procedures, the excepted service hiring procedures under 5 CFR Part 302  and this Instruction apply.
Regardless of hiring authority, excepted positions are not subject to the appointment rules/regulations of the competitive service.
302-1-60 Classification, Qualifications & Recruitment
Classification. Unless specifically exempted by the applicable excepted authority, excepted service positions covered under this Instruction are classified using the OPM Position Classification Standards.
Qualification Standards. Unless specifically exempted by the applicable excepted authority or the existence of valid HHS-specific qualification standards, OPM’s Qualification Standards apply. OpDiv/StaffDiv-developed qualification standards for positions covered under this Instruction must adhere to the requirements under 5 CFR §302.202 ; be validated by an Industrial Organizational (I/O) Psychologist or reviewed by legal counsel to ensure they are legally supportable; and reviewed by HHS OHR for conformity to regulatory requirements prior to use. HR Centers maintain a permanent record of such approved qualification standards, and provide information about such standards to an applicant upon his/her request.
Recruitment Methods. Unless required by statutory or federal regulatory authority (e.g., Pathways Programs), vacancies for excepted service positions are not required to be posted on USAJOBS. However, the merit system principles apply to excepted service recruitment; therefore, HR Centers must use recruitment methods that notify applicants of excepted service vacancies within their Division so that interested applicants have a reasonable opportunity to apply. HR Centers must document their recruitment procedures and the acceptance of excepted service applications (5 U.S.C. §§2301 and 5 CFR §302.301 ).
Notification options, include, but are not limited to, notice on the HHS or OpDiv/StaffDiv’s website of existing or future excepted service vacancies; notices provided at job fairs; or a traditional JOA;
OpDivs/StaffDivs must consider whether their method of recruitment and time allowed provides for fair and open competition, attracts a sufficient pool of qualified candidates, and ensures potential applicants will receive fair and equitable treatment;
Applications are accepted from ‘Current Federal Employees,’ ‘Former Federal Employees,’ ‘Internal Employees/Agency Employees’ or ‘U.S. Citizens.’
Under no circumstances should an excepted service JOA be restricted to ‘Status Candidates’ since excepted employees do not acquire competitive status unless they have previously held a non-temporary competitive service position.
Applications from persons with disabilities (Schedule A, 5 CFR §213.3102(u)) may be accepted.
OpDivs/StaffDivs may use the following options to manage application volume for positions that attract a high number of applicants. OpDiv/StaffDiv procedures for receiving applications must address the use of these options (5 CFR §302.301 ). When one or more of the limitations are used, the limitations must be stated in the JOA, advertisement, or notice and justification included in the recruitment case file.
Limiting the number of days a JOA is open: OpDivs/StaffDivs have the discretion to determine the length of time that a JOA is open. When doing so, organizations should give consideration to the types, grade levels, and geographic locations of the positions being filled; and ensure the time allowed provides for fair and open competition that ensures potential applicants have reasonable opportunity to apply consistent with the merit system principles.
Limiting the number of applications received: OpDivs/StaffDivs have the discretion to set “cut-offs” or limits (e.g., the first 100 applications received) on the number of applications that they will consider when filling a position. When using such limits, HR Centers shall accept any application received up until 11:59 p.m. on the day the limit is reached in order to accommodate applicants in non-Eastern time zones.
Veterans Preference. OpDivs/StaffDivs must ensure veterans’ preference provisions are applied in accordance with 5 U.S.C. §3320 ; 5 CFR Part 211; and this Instruction when filling excepted service positions. HR Centers shall request additional information from applicants when there is conflicting documentation in their application package concerning their claimed veterans’ preference. For example, in cases where the applicant submits supporting evidence that shows they are entitled to veterans’ preference, but also provides contradictory evidence that shows they are not entitled to veterans’ preference they are claiming, HR Specialists must request additional information, as necessary, to ensure veterans’ preference is adjudicated properly.
302-1-70 Priority Consideration Candidates
OpDivs/StaffDivs must provide reemployment consideration to former HHS excepted service employees registered on HHS’ Priority Reemployment List (PRL) when filling excepted service positions (HHS Instruction, 330-2, Priority Placement Programs), following the assessment and selection procedures described in this Instruction.
Qualified candidates on HHS’ PRL must be given selection priority before referring the names of other qualified candidates (5 CFR 302.304(a) ).
OpDivs/StaffDivs may appoint a candidate who is not a PRL eligible, or a PRL eligible who has a lower standing on the PRL list, when the PRL eligible(s) qualifications will create an undue interruption to the position. The HR Center must notify each PRL eligible of the reasons for non-selection and must also notify any preference eligible(s) on the PRL list of their right to appeal to the MSPB (5 CFR 302.304(a)). This documentation must be maintained in the recruitment case file.
Once an HR Center fulfills these requirements, other excepted service candidates may be considered for the position.
HR Centers must retain sufficient documentation to demonstrate PRL clearance for each excepted service vacancy.
302-1-80 Assessment and Selection Procedures
OpDivs/StaffDivs must follow the provisions of 5 CFR Parts 211  and 302  relating to the examination, rating, and selection of an applicant, when a qualified preference eligible, non- preference eligible, or person entitled to priority consideration applies for appointment to a position covered by this Instruction.
OpDivs/StaffDivs must use job related assessment methods to evaluate candidates; document its assessment and selection procedures; apply them uniformly; and furnish applicants information on such procedures and their ratings upon request in accordance with 5 CFR Part 302, Subpart C .
Veterans’ preference is granted as follows (5 CFR §302.201 ):
When eligible candidates are referred without numerical ratings, preference is noted as:
‘CP’ for preference eligibles having compensable service connected disability of 10% or more (5 U.S.C. §2108(3)(C));
‘XP’ for all other candidates eligible for 10-point veteran preference (5 U.S.C.§2108(3)(D-G) ;
‘TP’ for candidates eligible for 5-point veteran preference (5 U.S.C. §2108(3)(A-B)); and
‘SSP’ for candidates eligible for sole survivorship preference (5 U.S.C. §2108(3)(H)).
When numerical ratings are used, 10 additional points are given to preference eligibles described under 1. a. and b. above; 5 additional points are granted to preference eligibles described under 1. c. above; and 0 additional points are given to sole survivorship preference eligibles.
Assessment. OpDivs/StaffDivs may evaluate candidates based on eligibility/ineligibility determinations, numerical scores, or a category rating-like process (5 CFR §302.302 ).
Alternate rating and selection procedures may be developed, such as procedures similar to category rating (e.g., category grouping), to fill excepted service positions, as long as the procedures give preference and priority consideration eligibles at least as much advantage as they would receive under the 5 CFR Part 302  hiring procedures (5 U.S.C§3320 ; 5 CFR §302.105 ). Such procedures must be documented and applied uniformly across similar/same types of positions.
Reasons are documented for using a ranked or unranked referral lists (5 CFR§302.302(a)) and the quality ranking factors used, if using numerical rating or category grouping.
Numerical ratings are assigned on a scale of 100, with each qualified candidate assigned a rating of 70 or more (plus any additional veteran preference points). Numerical ratings are not required when all qualified applicants will be offered immediate employment (5 CFR §302.302(b)).
When there is a high volume of applicants, ratings are only required for a sufficient number of the highest-qualified applicants to meet the OpDiv/StaffDiv’s needs within a reasonable time; however, preference eligible candidates are still considered in the order they would have been considered if all applicants had been assigned ratings (5 CFR§302.302(b)).
Certificates and Order of Consideration. Qualified candidates are placed on a certificate in the following order (5 CFR §211.102(d)(3) ; 5 CFR §302.303(d) ; 5 CFR §302.304 ):
Priority reemployment candidates. Qualified candidates on HHS’s PRL must be given selection priority before other candidates can be referred, in accordance with 5 CFR §302.304(a) , and are placed on a PRL certificate in one of the orders listed in 2. below.
Other candidates are considered in one of the following orders:
When candidates are rated only for basic eligibility:
Qualified preference eligibles that have a compensable, service-connected disability of 10% or more;
All other qualified candidates eligible for 10-point veteran preference;
All qualified candidates eligible for 5-point veteran preference;
All qualified candidates eligible for sole survivorship; and lastly
Qualified candidates not eligible for veteran preference.
When candidates have been assigned numerical ratings:
Qualified preference eligibles having a compensable, service-connected disability of 10% or more, in order of the augmented ratings; and
All other qualified candidates in the order of their augmented ratings. At each score, qualified candidates eligible for 10-point preference are entered ahead of those eligible for 5-point preference, followed by sole survivorship preference eligibles, then lastly qualified non-preference eligible candidates.
When candidates have the same numerical ratings, preference eligibles are listed ahead of non-preference eligibles (5 CFR §211.102(d)(3) ).
For professional and scientific positions at the GS-9 grade level and above:
If numerical ratings are assigned, applicants are considered in the order of their scores, augmented for veterans’ preference. When candidates have the same numerical ratings, preference eligibles are listed ahead of non-preference eligibles (5 CFR §211.102(d)(3) ); or
If numerical scores have not been assigned, all preference eligibles are considered together regardless of the type of preference, followed by other candidates.
Order specified in the OpDiv/StaffDiv’s alternate rating and selection procedures, in accordance with 5 CFR §302.105, and the assessment procedures above.
Selection.
OpDivs/StaffDivs must adhere to the selection procedures under 5 CFR §302.401(a) , or follow its alternate rating and selection procedures (such as category grouping), when making selections from priority reemployment or regular certificates. The Indian Health Service must give selection priority in accordance with 25 U.S.C. §5117, prior to applying the veterans’ preference provisions under 5 CFR Part 302.
Selections under 5 CFR §302.401(a) :
When numerical ratings are assigned, selections are made from the highest three candidates listed in Order A, i.e., preference eligibles who have a compensable service-connected disability of 10 percent or more, followed by all other qualified candidates, in the order of their numerical ratings, with preference eligibles listed ahead of non-preference eligibles with the same ratings (5 CFR §211.102(d)(3)).
When numerical ratings are not assigned, selections are made from the highest preference category, as long as at least three candidates are in that group. When fewer than three candidates are in the highest preference category, consideration may be expanded to include the next highest preference category.
Selections under OpDiv/StaffDiv alternate rating and selection procedures:
Documented alternate rating and selection procedures must be applied uniformly.
If making selections under category rating-like (e.g., category grouping) procedures, OpDivs/StaffDivs must select from the highest quality category (i.e., any preference eligible within the highest quality category may be selected; veterans have selection preference over non-veterans; preference eligibles with a 10% or more disability are placed in the highest quality category ahead of the non-preference eligibles, except for scientific or professional positions at the GS- 9 level or higher).
Selection of Competitive Service Candidate. A written statement must be obtained from a non-temporary competitive service candidate, acknowledging s(he) is voluntarily leaving the competitive service to accept the position in the excepted service (5 CFR §302.102(b) ). Such employees generally do not lose appeal rights, see Section 302-1-100 of this Instruction. In addition, employees who previously held a non-temporary competitive service position retain their competitive service status and may continue to apply to competitive service positions open to ‘status’ candidates. (Employees should be advised to provide a SF-50 showing they previously held a non-temporary competitive service position when applying to jobs.) Excepted employees who have never served in a non-temporary competitive service position are eligible to apply only to competitive service announcements open to all candidates or U.S. Citizens.
Pass Overs and Objections of Preference Eligibles (5 CFR 302.401(b) and OPM Delegated Examining Operations Handbook).
OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Directors may approve or deny pass over requests of less than 30 percent compensable disabled veterans for excepted service positions and document reason(s) for selecting a non-preference eligible. This approval may not be redelegated below the HR Director level.
The following pass over and objection requests require OPM approval before making selections for excepted service positions covered under this Instruction:
A pass over of any preference eligible with a 30 percent or more compensable service connected disability (5 U.S.C §3318 );
A pass over of a preference eligible based on medical qualifications (5 CFR§§339 ); and
Suitability determinations involving material, intentional false statement, deception or fraud in examination or appointment, or refusal to furnish testimony as required by 5 CFR §731.103(a) .
Pass over requests requiring OPM approval must be sent to the HHS OHR for review and concurrence. OHR will send the request to OPM if it concurs with the request. HR Centers must submit the following documentation to HHS OHR:
Completed SF-62, Agency Request to Passover a Preference Eligible or Object to an Eligible, www.opm.gov/Forms/pdf_fill/SF62.pdf - PDF;
Resume/Application package to include title, series, and grade;
Copy of Position Description;
Copy of Vacancy Announcement;
Certificate of Eligibles; and
A memorandum approved by the HR Director with a description of the reason sufficient to sustain an objection/pass over.
No correspondence is sent to a 30 percent or more compensable disabled applicant until HHS OHR concurrence is received. Only after OPM has approved the pass over of the preference eligible may the 30 percent or more compensable disabled veteran be passed over and another applicant selected.
OpDivs/StaffDivs should be mindful of 5 U.S.C. §3320  and 5 CFR §332.406  when considering reasons for passing over a preference eligible, and consult with their legal counsel, if necessary, on whether the justification is likely to meet the standard of making selections in the same manner and under the same conditions required for the competitive service, as required by 5 U.S.C. §3320 .
302-1-90 Other Actions And Appointment Time Limits
Details. Details of employees in the excepted service are made in accordance with the rules under 5 CFR §300.301 , and HHS Instruction 300-3, Details and IPA Assignments.
Reassignments. Individuals reassigned to another position without promotion or change to lower grade, level or band must meet the qualification requirements described in 302-1-60 B. of this Instruction for the excepted service position (series and grade).
Promotions.
The merit system principles apply to promotions within the excepted service; therefore, the employee must compete/have competed for the proposed position/grade level(s) otherwise the action is a prohibited personnel practice (5 U.S.C. §§2301 and 2302).
Promotions within the excepted service are not subject to the time-in-grade restrictions outlined in 5 CFR Part 300, Subpart F ; however, employees must meet the qualification requirements for the position (series and grade). Time-in-grade restrictions outlined in 5 CFR Part 300, Subpart F, apply to movement to or within the competitive service; therefore, while promotions within the excepted service are not subject to time-in-grade; promotions upon non-competitive conversion to the competitive service (for excepted service authorities that authorize non-competitive conversion) are subject to time-in-grade restrictions.
The requirements such as age, height, and weight in determining qualifications for a promotion for a preference eligible are waived unless the qualification(s) is/are essential to the performance of the duties of the position (5 CFR §302.403 ).
The physical requirements of a position in cases of promotion are waived if, in the opinion of the employing OpDiv/StaffDiv, and after considering the recommendation of an accredited physician, the preference eligible is physically able to perform the duties of the position (5 CFR §302.403 ).
Reappointments. OpDivs/StaffDivs may reappoint a current or former non-temporary federal employee who is a preference eligible to a vacant HHS position without regard to the names of qualified applicants on HHS’ PRL or a regular employment list (5 CFR §302.402 ).
Appointment Time Limits. The time limits described under 5 CFR §213.104 for temporary, time-limited, intermittent, or seasonal excepted appointments are followed.
302-1-100 Appeals
Excepted service employees who meet the definition of ‘employee’ under 5 U.S.C §7511(a)(1)(B)-(C)  are generally entitled to appeal rights to the MSPB. Servicing Employee Relations staff should be consulted when dealing with unacceptable performance and/or employee misconduct to ensure actions are in compliance with law, regulations, HHS policy, and applicable collective bargaining agreement(s).
Individuals entitled to priority consideration who are preference eligibles, or suffered a compensable injury, have appeal rights to the MSPB if they believe their reemployment rights were violated (5 CFR §§302.103; 302.304(a) and 302.501).
302-1-110 Personnel Actions
OPM’s Guide to Processing Personnel Actions, Chapter 11, Excepted Service Appointments, is used when processing personnel actions, and the specific law/statute, Executive Order (E.O.), or Schedule (A. B, C, etc.) authority that authorizes the appointment must be cited.
Tenure is assigned following guidance in OPM’s Guide to Data Standards. Generally, time- limited or temporary appointments are Tenure Code 3; individuals serving trial periods are assigned Tenure Code 2; and employees who have completed trial periods and are on permanent appointments are Tenure Code 1.
302-1-120 Documentation and Accountability
Records associated with hiring actions should be retained in individual recruitment case files to allow for third-party reconstruction. Records associated with personnel actions, including all documentation sufficient for third party reconstruction purposes, must be retained according to the record disposition schedule. Generally, all records created in a given year must be retained for a total of three (3) full years. Records involved in litigation and grievance processes may be destroyed only after official notification is received from OPM, Department of Justice, courts, the Office of the General Counsel, etc. that the matter has been fully litigated, or resolved, and closed.
HHS OHR will conduct periodic accountability reviews to analyze compliance with this Instruction, HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.



















304-1
HHS Instruction: 304-1: Appointment of Experts and Consultants
Effective Date: 08/17/2023

Material Transmitted:

HHS Instruction 304-1, Appointment of Experts and Consultants, dated 08/17/2023.

Material Superseded:

HHS Instruction 304-1, Appointment of Experts and Consultants, dated 04/21/2023.

Background:

This Instruction has been revised to update eligibility for federal benefits due to a OPM regulatory change extending the Federal Employees Dental and Vision Insurance Program (FEDVIP) to certain employees on temporary or intermitted employment.

This policy is effective immediately and must be carried out by HHS Operating and Staff Division HR Centers in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, collective bargaining agreements, and Departmental policy.

/s/

W. Robert Leavitt
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources
Chief Human Capital Officer

Subject: Appointment of Experts and Consultants
304-1-00   Purpose
304-1-10   Coverage and Exclusions
304-1-20   References
304-1-30   Definitions
304-1-40   Responsibilities
304-1-50   Appointment and Reappointment
304-1-60   Compensation, Leave, and Benefits
304-1-70   Appeal Rights
304-1-80   Personnel Actions
304-1-90   Documentation, Reporting, and Accountability

304-1-00 Purpose
This Instruction establishes policy, responsibility and requirements on the appointment and compensation of individuals hired under Title 5, United States Code (U.S.C.) Section 3109 and 5 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 304.

When provisions of this policy differ from changes in applicable law or regulation, the changes in law or regulation apply. 

304-1-10 Coverage and Exclusions
Coverage.
This Instruction covers all paid and unpaid appointments under 5 U.S.C. §3109 to provide professional or technical expertise that does not exist or is not readily available within HHS, or to perform services that are not of a continuing nature and/or could not be performed by HHS employees. 
The HHS Secretary may obtain in accordance with 5 U.S.C. §3109, but without regard to the time limitations under 5 U.S.C. §3109, services for not more than 50 experts or consultants who have scientific or professional qualifications in the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), 42 U.S.C. §299c-5(f) . 
The Assistant Secretary of the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) may obtain in accordance with 5 U.S.C. §3109, but without regard to the time limitations under 5 U.S.C. §3109, services for not more than 20 experts or consultants who have professional qualifications, 42 U.S.C. §290aa(h) .  
The Director of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) may appoint in accordance with 5 U.S.C. §3109, but without regard to the time limitations under 5 U.S.C. §3109, up to 220 NIH experts and consultants with scientific or other professional qualifications, 42 U.S.C. §282d . 
The Director of the National Cancer Institute (NIH NCI) may obtain after consultation with the NCI advisory council and in accordance with 5 U.S.C. §3109, but without regard to the time limitations under 5 U.S.C. §3109, the services of not more than 151 experts or consultants who have scientific or professional qualifications, 42 U.S.C. §285a–2(b)(5) . 
Exclusions.  In accordance with 5 CFR Part 304, this Instruction does not apply to: 
Procurement of expert or consultant services by contracts.
Expert or consultant appointments via other employment authorities (e.g., 5 CFR §213.3102(l)), 42 U.S.C. §209(f), etc.); or
Positions or work listed under 5 CFR §304.103(b).
As of the date of this policy, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) does not have authorization to use 5 U.S.C. 3109 to hire or pay experts or consultants, and the Indian Health Service (IHS) has temporary authorization through its FY2023 annual appropriations to use 5 U.S.C. §3109 to hire or pay experts or consultants.  In accordance with 5 U.S.C. §3109(b), FDA and/or IHS must establish a provision in its annual appropriations, i.e., for FDA, the Department of Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, or for IHS, the Department of Interior, Environment, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, or other statute before using 5 U.S.C. §3109. 
Bargaining Unit Employees.  The provisions of this Instruction pertaining to conditions of employment of bargaining unit employees are fully negotiable in accordance with 5 U.S.C. Chapter 71 , and such actions require notification to labor organizations when impacted employees are bargaining unit employees.  When the provisions of this Instruction differ from the requirements contained in applicable collective bargaining agreement(s), the collective bargaining agreement takes precedence for bargaining unit employees.
304-1-20 References
Permanent authority for HHS (except FDA and IHS) to use 5 U.S.C. §3109:  Departments of Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 1993, Public Law 102-394, Title V, §503, 106 Stat. 1825 (Oct. 6, 1992).

SEC. 503.  Appropriations contained in this Act or subsequent Departments of Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education, and Related Agencies Appropriations Acts, available for salaries and expenses, shall be available for services as authorized by 5 U.S.C. §3109 but at rates for individuals not to exceed the per diem rate equivalent to the maximum rate payable for senior-level positions under 5 U.S.C. §5376. 1
42 U.S.C. §282d, Director National Institutes of Health, Services of experts or consultants 
42 U.S.C. §285a–2(b)(5), Special Authorities of Director [National Cancer Institute] 
42 U.S.C. §290aa(h), Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, Services of Experts 
42 U.S.C. §299c-5(f), Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, Certain Administrative Authorities, Experts 
5 U.S.C. §3109, Employment of Experts and Consultants; temporary or intermittent 
5 U.S.C. §5533(d)(1), Dual Pay for More than One Position; Exceptions 
5 CFR Part 304, Expert and Consultant Appointments
OPM Fact Sheet:  Expert and Consultant Pay
304-1-30 Definitions
Advisory committee member.  Is appointed as an expert or consultant pursuant to 5 U.S.C. §3109 to serve on a federal advisory committee per Appointment of Consultants to FACA | GSA.  The requirements in this Instruction apply to these appointments. 
Agency.   HHS (5 U.S.C. §105 and 5 CFR §304.102(a)).   
Consultant.  A person who can provide valuable and pertinent advice generally drawn from a high degree of broad administrative, professional, or technical knowledge or experience (5 CFR §304.102(b)).
Expert.  A person who is specially qualified by education and experience to perform difficult and challenging tasks in a particular field beyond the usual range of achievement of competent persons in that field.  An expert is regarded by other persons in the field as an authority or practitioner of unusual competence and skill in a professional, scientific, technical or other activity (5 CFR §304.102(d)).
Intermittent employment.  Employment without a regularly scheduled tour of duty (5 CFR §304.102(f)).
Service year.  The calendar year that begins on the date of the individual's initial appointment in the agency (5 CFR §304.103(c)(2)(i)).
Temporary employment.  Employment not to exceed one (1) year.  An expert or consultant serving under a temporary appointment may have a full-time, part-time, seasonal, or intermittent work schedule (5 CFR §304.102(g)).
Employment without compensation.  Unpaid (not volunteer) service that is provided at the agency’s request to perform duties that are unclassified.  Unpaid employees must agree in advance in writing to waive any claim for compensation for their services (5 CFR §§304.102(h) and 304.104(c)).
304-1-40 Responsibilities
 HHS Assistant Secretary for Administration, Office of Human Resources (ASA/OHR):
Establishes Department-wide human resources policy and guidance consistent with HHS and Office of Personnel Management (OPM) policy, procedures guidance and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Submits requests to OPM for approval of reappointments that are an exception to the limits outlined in 5 CFR §304.103(c), when necessitated by unforeseen or unusual circumstances.
Submits a Department-wide annual report to OPM, as required by law and regulation.
Periodically reviews Operating Division and Staff Division (OpDiv/StaffDiv) Expert and Consultant appointments to assure conformance with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Human Resources Centers (HR Centers):
Comply with this Instruction, any HHS and OPM policy, procedures guidance and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Ensure the need for experts and consultants, or continuing need in cases of reappointment, is appropriately justified and documented.
Set and adjust pay in accordance with law, regulation, this Instruction, and OPM’s Fact Sheet: Expert and Consultant Pay; or, when applicable, obtain and maintain an expert/consultant’s written compensation waiver pursuant to 5 CFR §304.104(c).
Ensure HR staff receive training and information to ensure that officials and employees using the authority understand the statutory and regulatory requirements, in accordance with 5 CFR §304.108(a)(1).
Ensure an annual review of, and report on, expert and consultant appointments to ensure compliance with 5 U.S.C. §3109, 5 CFR Part 304, and this Instruction.
304-1-50 Appointment and Reappointment
Individuals appointed under 5 U.S.C. §3109 are specifically exempted from the provisions related to competitive examination (5 CFR Part 332), position classification (5 U.S.C. Chapter 51), and General Schedule pay setting (5 U.S.C. Chapter 53, Subchapter III), in accordance with 5 CFR §304.103(a).
Appointments may be made on:
A temporary basis (i.e., up to one (1) year); or
A strictly intermittent basis without time limit or for a period determined by the employing OpDiv/StaffDiv. 
Individuals appointed on a temporary basis may be reappointed within the agency (i.e., HHS), in accordance with 5 CFR §304.103(c) and this Instruction, unless otherwise authorized by statute:
OpDivs/StaffDivs may reappoint temporary experts or consultants to perform demonstrably different duties without regard to the length of that individual’s previous expert or consultant service with HHS (5 CFR §304.103(c)).
OpDivs/StaffDivs may reappoint temporary experts and consultants to perform substantially the same duties subject to the following limitations (5 CFR §304.103(c)(1-2)):
An individual who works on a full-time work schedule may be appointed under 5 U.S.C. §3109 at HHS for a maximum of two (2) years (i.e., on an initial appointment not to exceed one (1) year and a reappointment not to exceed one (1) additional year).
An individual who works on a part-time or intermittent work schedule may be reappointed under one of the following options. The OpDiv/StaffDiv must determine which option it will use in advance of the reappointment and must base its determination on objective criteria (e.g., nature of duties, pay level, whether or not work is regularly scheduled.)  Note:  Option 1 must be applied to reappointments of individuals appointed without compensation.
Option 1 -- Annual service.  An expert or consultant may be reappointed, with no limit on the number of reappointments, as long as the individual is paid for no more than six (6) months (130 days or 1,040 hours) of work (or works for no more than that amount of time without compensation) in a service year.  An expert or consultant who exceeds this limit in his/her first service year may be reappointed for one (1) additional year.  An expert or consultant who exceeds the limit during any subsequent service year may not be reappointed.    
Option 2 -- Cumulative earnings.  Under Option 2, HHS experts or consultants have a lifetime limit of twice the maximum applicable salary rate, in accordance with 5 U.S.C. §3109(b), the Appropriation Act(s) listed in this Instruction, and 5 CFR §304.103(c)(2)(ii). OpDivs/StaffDivs may reappoint an individual until his/her total earnings from expert or consultant employment within HHS reach the lifetime maximum, as determined by using the applicable maximum salary rate.  At that point, the employment must be terminated.
304-1-60 Compensation, Leave, and Benefits
Experts and consultants are generally covered by the laws that apply to federal employees, including laws related to compensation, leave, overtime, reduction of basic pay by amount of annuity received, reduction of military pay, etc., subject to the provisions described under 5 U.S.C. Chapter 63; 5 CFR §304.106; and this Instruction.  
The rate of basic pay for individuals hired under 5 U.S.C. §3109 is set by the OpDiv/StaffDiv on an hourly or daily basis, not to exceed the pay limits specified in the appropriation or other statute that authorizes the appointment (5 U.S.C. §3109(b); HHS Appropriations Act(s) listed this Instruction;    5 CFR §304.104 and 105). 
The Departments of Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 1993 (Public Law 102-394, Title V, §503, 106 Stat. 1825 (Oct. 6, 1992)) covers all HHS OpDivs/StaffDivs, with the exception of Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the Indian Health Service (IHS), and gives permanent authorization to set pay for services authorized by 5 U.S.C. §3109 at rates not to exceed the daily rate equivalent to the maximum rate payable for senior-level positions under 5 U.S.C. §5376.  The maximum rate of pay cannot exceed Level IV of the Executive Schedule which was the maximum rate of basic pay for senior level positions under 5 U.S.C. 5376 when the permanent appropriations cap was enacted in 1993 (OPM Memo, New SL/ST Pay System, dated April 2, 2009, and Pay for Consultants and Scientists Appointed under Title 42, B-323357 (Comp. Gen. July 11, 2012).
The initial rate of basic pay is determined in consideration with the following factors:
The level and difficulty of the work to be performed;
The qualifications of the expert or consultant;
The pay rates of comparable individuals performing similar work in the Federal or non-Federal sectors; and
The availability of qualified candidates (5 CFR §304.104(b)).
An expert or consultant may be employed without compensation, provided the individual agrees in advance in writing to waive any claim for compensation for those services (5 CFR §304.104(c)). 
Because individuals appointed under 5 U.S.C. §3109 are explicitly exempted from the general schedule (5 CFR §304.103(a)(1)), those paid on a daily basis are not entitled to overtime. However, experts and consultants who are nonexempt from the minimum wage and overtime provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) may be entitled to overtime pay under FLSA (5 CFR §304.106(c) and 5 CFR Part 551).
Experts and consultants who have a regular scheduled tour of duty qualify for premium pay if they meet the applicable eligibility requirements under 5 U.S.C. §§5541-5550b. 
Experts and consultants are not entitled to receive locality pay adjustments or automatic  adjustments in their rates of basic pay at the time of general pay increases described under 5 U.S.C. 5303 since they are not General Schedule employees.  Such pay adjustments are at the OpDiv/StaffDiv’s discretion, unless specifically authorized in the employee’s official appointing document.  (5 CFR §304.106(a) and OPM Fact Sheet: Expert and Consultant Pay)
OpDivs/StaffDivs have the authority to adjust the pay of experts and consultants after initial appointment, in accordance with its internal guidance on the amount and timing of expert and consultant pay adjustments and subject the pay limitations in this Instruction.  In addition to the factors listed above, job performance, contributions to OpDiv/StaffDiv mission, and the general pay increases given to other OpDiv/StaffDiv employees are considered in determining pay adjustments in accordance with 5 CFR §304.106(a). 
Experts and consultants may be paid on an intermittent basis for more than one (1) expert or consultant appointment; however, they may not be paid for service for the same days/hours (5 CFR §304.106(d)). OpDivs/StaffDivs should inquire at the time of appointment if the individual is currently serving on another expert or consultant appointment and advise the employee of this pay restriction and their responsibility to inform HHS if their employment status changes to avoid financial indebtedness.
Experts and consultants with a regular tour of duty (i.e., not intermittent) are covered by the leave provisions under 5 U.S.C. Chapter 63 (5 CFR §304.106(g) and OPM Fact Sheet: Expert and Consultant Pay).
Experts and consultants whose service is intermittent or are serving under a temporary appointment for one year or less are not covered under the Federal Employees Retirement System and are generally ineligible for health benefits, life insurance, or retirement with limited regulatory exceptions.  If an employee currently covered by federal retirement, life insurance, or health benefits is appointed as an expert or consultant without a break in service or after a separation from service of three days or less, coverage is continued.  To continue life insurance coverage for an intermittent employee, there must be an expectation that the employee will return to the previous position on a full-time basis (See 5 CFR §§ 831.201; 870.302; 890.102).  HR Centers and employees should consult their servicing HR benefits specialist concerning eligibility or the continuation of federal benefits.
See OPM Fact Sheet: Expert and Consultant Pay for additional guidance on calculating rates of pay; locality payments; overtime and other premium pay; and leave benefits.
Experts and consultants are not covered by the HHS Performance Management Appraisal Program (HHS Instruction 430-1, Performance Management Appraisal Program).  They are eligible for awards in accordance with HHS Instruction 451-1, Awards.  Questions on performance and awards should be sent to HCP-HHS@hhs.gov.  
304-1-70 Appeal Rights
In some circumstances, individuals appointed as an expert or consultant under 5 U.S.C. §3109 may have appeal rights to the Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB).  Excepted service employees who meet the definition of ‘employee’ under 5 U.S.C §7511(a)(1)(B-C) generally have appeal rights to the MSPB for adverse actions. Servicing employee relations staff should be consulted when dealing with unacceptable performance and/or employee misconduct to ensure actions are in compliance with law, regulations, HHS policy, and applicable collective bargaining agreement(s).

304-1-80 Personnel Actions
When processing personnel actions, OPM’s Guide to Processing Personnel Actions (GPPA), Chapter 11, Excepted Service Appointments, is used (Authority Code, H2L; and Legal Authority, Reg. 304.103).
Authority code ‘ZLM’ is also cited with the applicable Appropriations Act or statute that authorizes the appointment under 5 U.S.C. §3109 (see Coverage and References), in accordance with the GPPA:  
ZLM and the Appropriations Act that authorizes the OpDiv/StaffDiv to appoint and pay experts and consultants under 5 U.S.C. §3109; and additionally
(For AHRQ, NIH, and SAMHSA as of the date of this policy) ZLM and the Title 42 statute that authorizes the OpDiv/StaffDiv to appoint a specific number of experts and consultants without regard to 5 U.S.C. §3109 appointment time limits.
Position title is “Expert” or “Consultant.”  Series “0000” and no General Schedule grade are assigned.  (5 CFR §304.103(a)(1))
The ED, EF, or EH pay plan is used for Experts and Consultants covered under this policy in accordance with the OPM’s Data Standards.  
Tenure is assigned in accordance with OPM’s Data Standards. Generally, time-limited, or temporary appointments are Tenure Code 3.
Remark code E21 should be used for individuals who are designated ‘special government employees,’ as defined under 18 U.S.C. §202.  Questions regarding this ethics designation should be directed to an OpDiv/StaffDiv’s servicing ethics office.  A list of servicing Deputy Ethics Counselors and Ethics Coordinators can be found at https://www.hhs.gov/about/agencies/ogc/contact-ogc/agency-deputy-ethics-counselors-and-ethics-coordinators/index.html.
304-1-90 Documentation, Reporting, and Accountability
Documentation.  
To justify an appointment under 5 U.S.C. §3109, OpDivs/StaffDivs should record:
Name of employee;
Resume;
Rate of pay or signed compensation waiver;
Type of appointment (Temporary or Intermittent Expert or Consultant appointment);
If temporary, work schedule (full-time, part-time, seasonal, or intermittent);
Proposed length of appointment;
Description of duties to be performed;
Justification for appointing an expert of consultant and explanation how the individual meets the definition of an “expert” or “consultant;” and
Certification by the expert or consultant’s supervisor or manager that:
The appointment will not be used to appoint the individual to a position requiring Presidential appointment, or to a Senior Executive Service position;
The individual is not/will not perform managerial or supervisory work;
The individual is not being appointed to do work being performed by the OpDiv/StaffDiv’s regular employees;
The appointment will not be used to fill in during staff shortages; and
The appointment is not being made in anticipation of giving that person a career appointment (5 CFR §304.103(b)).
To justify a reappointment, OpDivs/StaffDivs should record: 
Explanation of the continuing need for the appointment and the services of the individual;
Whether the duties are the same or demonstrably different from the current or previous expert/consultant appointment;
Which reappointment option under 5 CFR §304.103(c) the OpDiv/StaffDiv has elected and the reasons for selecting that option; and
The number of days or hours worked in a service year (defined under Definitions), or cumulative earnings from expert/consultant employment.
Records associated with personnel actions, including all documentation sufficient for third party reconstruction purposes, must be retained for a total of three (3) full years after completion of the expert or consultant appointment. Records involved in litigation and grievance processes or subject to a litigation hold may be destroyed only after official notification is received from OPM, the Department of Justice, courts, the Office of the General Counsel, etc. that the matter has been fully litigated, or resolved, and closed.
Annual Reporting.  OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Centers are required to report at the beginning of each calendar year the following information to ASA/OHR at employmentpolicy@hhs.gov for each paid expert and consultant appointed in accordance with the provisions of 5 U.S.C. §3109 and on board during the preceding calendar year (5 U.S.C. §3109 and 5 CFR §304.107):
Employee Name;
Expert or Consultant Appointment;
Temporary or Intermittent employment;
Total pay (excluding travel) for the preceding calendar year; and
Total days worked for the preceding calendar year.
ASA/OHR will email an annual reminder about this reporting requirement.

Accountability. ASA/OHR may conduct periodic accountability reviews to analyze compliance with this Instruction, HHS and OPM policy and guidance and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Endnotes
1 Maximum EX-IV pay level.  See Section 304-1-60, Compensation.























315-1
315-1: Probationary and Trial Periods
Material Transmitted:
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 315-1, Probationary and Trial Periods, dated 08/18/2023.

Material Superseded:
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 315-1, Probationary and Trial Periods, dated 08/19/2021.

Background:
This Instruction clarifies when a probationary period is required after completion of a trial period, in accordance with law, regulation, Merit Systems Protection Board precedent, Departmental policy and Office of Personnel Management (OPM) guidance.

This policy is effective immediately and must be carried out by Operating and Staff Division (OpDiv/StaffDiv) HR Centers in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, bargaining agreements, and Departmental policy

/s/

W. Robert Leavitt
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources
Chief Human Capital Officer, Acting

315-1-00  Sections
351-1-10  Purpose
351-1-20  Coverage and Exclusions
351-1-30  References
351-1-40  Definitions
351-1-50  Responsibilities
351-1-60  Probationary and Trial Periods
351-1-70  Supervisor and Manager Probationary or Trial Periods
351-1-80  Performance Based and Adverse Actions
351-1-90 Documentation and Accountability

351-1-10 Purpose
This Instruction provides policy and procedures concerning probationary and trial periods within the Department of Health and Human Services (Department or HHS).

Probationary and trial periods provide an opportunity for supervisors to evaluate employee performance before finalizing appointments.  Supervisors set expectations for performance, provide feedback, and make the final decision whether a probationer satisfactorily completes their probation or trial period to continue employment.  Servicing Human Resources Offices (HROs) support supervisors by providing them the information and guidance they need to effectively perform these duties.  When used properly, probationary and trial periods are one of the most valid predictors of future success and can help ensure that the HHS has qualified, competent employees.

When provisions of this policy differ from changes in applicable law or regulation, the changes in law or regulation apply.

315-1-20 Coverage and Exclusions
Coverage.
This policy applies to HHS competitive and excepted service employees serving on initial appointments; federal wage system (FWS) employees; and employees serving supervisory and managerial probation or trial periods.
This policy applies to individuals hired under non-title 5 excepted service authorities, unless the provisions in the non-title 5 excepted authority specifically excludes individuals from appeal rights or exempts those individuals from 5 U.S.C. §7511’s definition of employee(Todd v. Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB) 1995, and Lal v. MSPB 2016).
Exclusions.
This policy does not apply to individuals serving on temporary limited positions of one (1) year or less in the competitive and excepted services, or members of the Senior Executive Service (SES), Senior Level (SL) or Scientific or Professional (ST).
The provisions of this Instruction pertaining to conditions of employment of bargaining unit employees are fully negotiable in accordance with 5 U.S.C. Chapter 71 , and such actions require notification to labor organizations when impacted employees are bargaining unit employees.  When the provisions of this Instruction differ from the requirements contained in applicable collective bargaining agreement(s), the collective bargaining agreement takes precedence for bargaining unit employees.
315-1-30  References
5 United States Code (U.S.C.) Section 3321, Competitive Service; probationary period 
5 U.S.C. §7511, Adverse Actions; employee defined 
5 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 315, Subpart H, Probation on Initial Appointment to a Competitive Position
5 CFR Part 315, Subpart I, Probation on Initial Appointment to a Supervisory or Managerial Position
5 CFR Part 316, Temporary and Term Employment (trial period for term employees)
5 CFR Part 432, Performance Based Reduction in Grade and Removal Actions
5 CFR Part 752, Adverse Actions
HHS Instruction, 430-1, Performance Management Appraisal Program (non SES)
HHS Instruction, 752, Discipline and Adverse Actions
315-1-40  Definitions
Employee. An individual serving in a competitive or excepted service position, and who, by definition of 'employee' under 5 U.S.C. §7511, has the full rights and protections of a federal employee. This generally happens after completion of a probation or trial period, although there are exceptions in 5 U.S.C. §7511. Once an individual meets the definition of an employee, they have due process rights and are entitled to advance written notice, an opportunity to respond to a proposed adverse action, and appeal rights to the MSPB.
Probationary period. An introductory period of employment for individuals in competitive service positions serving on a career or career-conditional appointment under 5 CFR Part 315, which allows management to evaluate a new employee's performance and conduct to determine whether his/her continued employment is in the best interest of the Department.
Trial Period. An introductory period of employment for individuals in excepted service positions and individuals on a term appointment in the competitive service, which allows management to evaluate a new employee's performance and conduct to determine whether his/her continued employment is in the best interest of the Department.
Manager. A manager supervises other supervisors and is not a member of the SES. Managers direct the work of an organizational unit; are held accountable for the success of specific line or staff functions; monitor and evaluate the progress of the organization toward meeting goals, and make adjustments in objectives, work plans, schedules, and commitment of resources (OPM's General Schedule Supervisory Guide).
Supervisor. A supervisor accomplishes work through the direction of other people and performs at least the minimum supervisory duties required, described in OPM's General Schedule Supervisory Guide. They plan work; communicate organizational goals and policies; guide performance; listen to concerns and ideas; ensure employees have the resources needed to do their jobs; and often make difficult decisions about employee recruitment, retention, development, recognition, and appraisal. Supervisors are also often expected to perform work of the office that requires technical skills.
315-1-50  Responsibilities
HHS Assistant Secretary for Administration, Office of Human Resources (ASA/OHR):
Develops Department-wide human resources guidance and policy regarding probationary and trial periods consistent with HHS and OPM policy, procedures and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Periodically conducts accountability reviews of HHS Operating Divisions/Staff Divisions (OpDivs/StaffDivs, or Divisions) use of probationary and trial periods to ensure conformance with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
OpDivs/StaffDivs
Comply with this policy, federal laws, regulations, and collective bargaining agreements covering probationary and trial periods.
Advise new hires and managers/supervisors of their probationary status; the length of the probation/trial period; the requirements for successfully completing the probation/trial period; and consequences for failing.  Information on probation/trial periods should also be included in vacancy announcements, especially when recruiting outside the federal government.
Establish performance standards for each employee, in accordance with HHS performance policy, that address performance expectations and organizational goals.
Issue performance plans on a timely basis, in accordance with HHS policy.
Evaluate and provide regular feedback to probationers regarding performance and conduct throughout their probation/trial period.
Support probationers through training, development, coaching, and mentoring opportunities to ensure successful performance, and to build their skills and/or improve in areas where they are not succeeding as appropriate.
Managers and supervisors promptly consult with their Division's servicing Employee Relations staff for assistance in dealing with unacceptable performance and/or employee misconduct to ensure actions are in compliance with law, regulations, and HHS policy.
Hold supervisors accountable for effectively using probationary and trial periods, including ensuring supervisors are monitoring probationers' performance and communicating regularly with probationers.
Properly annotate personnel actions when an employee is required to serve a probation or trial period and maintain records.
315-1-60   Probationary and Trial Periods
Applicability.
Individuals who are initially appointed to a non-temporary position in the competitive service must satisfactorily complete a one (1) year probationary period.  Persons who are transferred from another federal agency without a break in service of a single workday; or promoted, demoted, or reassigned before completion of a probationary period must complete their probationary period in the new position (5 CFR §315.801(b) and 802(a)).
As January 6, 2021 (initial date of policy issuance), individuals who are initially appointed to a non- temporary position in the excepted service must satisfactorily complete a two (2) year trial period, unless the law, Executive Order, or regulation authorizing the excepted service appointment specifies a shorter trial period.  Persons who are promoted, demoted, or reassigned before completion of a trial period must complete their trial period in the new excepted position.
An employee who has completed a trial period in the excepted service must complete an initial probationary period during the first (1st) year the employee is given a career or career-conditional appointment under the conditions specified under 5 CFR §315.801 unless the employee previously held a non-temporary competitive service position and completed an initial probationary period.
Individuals who are initially appointed to the competitive service either by a special appointing authority or by conversion from another hiring authority listed under 5 CFR Part 315, Subparts F or G, serve a one (1) year probationary period upon conversion unless specifically exempt from serving probation by the hiring authority itself (5 CFR §315.801(e)).  For example, Schedule A Persons With Disabilities employees (who have not previously held a non-temporary competitive service position and completed an initial probationary period) must serve a probationary period upon conversion because the Schedule A authority is listed under 5 CFR Part 315, Subpart G (5 CFR 315.709), and the Schedule A Disability authority (5 CFR 213.3102(u)) doesn’t specifically exempt probationary periods upon conversion
An employee who has completed a probationary period in the competitive service may be required to serve a trial period in the excepted service, subject to approval of the OpDiv/StaffDiv HRO, in consultation with the hiring manager and the provisions of the excepted appointing authority.  This requirement, if adopted, should be applied uniformly across similar positions within the Division (i.e., for all positions hired under the same excepted service appointing authority).
The first year of a term appointment is a trial period regardless of the method of appointment, in accordance with 5 CFR Part 316 (term appointments are in the competitive service yet serve a trial period).
Creditable Time.
Prior federal civilian service, including prior service in a temporary or excepted service position, is credited toward completion of an initial probationary period when the prior service is within HHS; in a same or similar position (determined by the employee's actual duties and responsibilities); and includes or is followed by no more than a single break in service that does not exceed 30 calendar days (5 CFR § 315.802(b); Hurst v. Dept. of the Army, 2010 MSPB 1 (January 6, 2010); Liu v. Dept. of Agriculture, 2007 MSPB 159 (June 19, 2007); and Sosa v. Dept. of Defense, 2006 MSPB 149 (June 5, 2006)).
Prior federal civilian service is credited toward completion of a trial period when the prior service is within HHS; in a same or similar HHS position (determined by the employee's actual duties and responsibilities); and includes or is followed by no more than a single break in service that does not exceed 30 calendar days, unless the law, Executive Order, or regulation authorizing the excepted service appointment specifies differently.
For individuals in term appointments, prior federal civilian service is credited toward completion of a trial period in the same manner as B.1. above (5 CFR §316.304(a)).
Absences in a non-pay status in excess of 22 workdays, except for periods of military service or compensable injury, extend the probation or trial period by the amount equal to the time off in non-pay status.
The probation or trial period for part-time employees is computed in the basis of calendar time, in the same manner as for full-time employees (5 CFR §315.802(d)); and
For intermittent employees, i.e., those who do not have regularly schedule tours of duty, each day or part of a day in a pay status counts as 1 day or credit toward the 260 days in a pay status required for completion of probation.  (However, the probationary period cannot be less than one (1) year, in accordance with 5 CFR §315.802(d). For intermittent employees in the excepted service, the trial period cannot be less than two (2) years.)
Completion of a Probation or Trial Period.
A probationary period ends when the employee completes his/her scheduled tour of duty on the day before the anniversary date of the employee's appointment, in accordance with 5 CFR §315.804(b).
A trial period ends when the employee completes his/her scheduled tour of duty on the day before the second (2nd) anniversary date of the employee's appointment.
Failure to Satisfactorily Complete an Initial Appointment Probation or Trial Period.
When a probationer does not successfully complete an initial appointment probation or trial period because the individual’s work performance or conduct fails to demonstrate fitness or qualifications for continued employment, the individual is terminated.
A probationer who does not successfully complete a trial period may have due process rights as an employee, as explained in this policy, if they have previously served in a competitive service position and completed an initial probationary period.
The OpDiv/StaffDiv's Employee Relations staff must be consulted prior to the end of the employee's probation or trial period to ensure the performance-based or adverse action requirements specified under 5 CFR Parts 432 and 752 are followed and the proposed action is legally supportable. See also Section 315-1-70, Performance Based and Adverse Actions.
Federal Wage System (FWS) Employees. OpDivs/StaffDivs consult their negotiated labor/management agreement(s) for rules covering probationary periods for FWS employees and establish internal procedures as necessary.
315-1-70  Supervisor and Manager Probationary or Trial Periods
Applicability.
An individual appointed for the first time to an HHS supervisory or (non-SES) managerial position without time limitation, must serve a one (1) year probationary period, in accordance with 5 U.S.C. §3321; and 5 CFR §315.904 and 905.
Individuals are required to complete a single probationary period when appointed for the first time to an HHS supervisory position, and a single probationary period when appointed for the first time to an HHS managerial position (5 CFR §315.904).
An employee who has previously completed a probationary period in a supervisor position or a probationary period in a managerial position does not need to serve another supervisory or managerial probationary period; however, service credit is not transferable between manager and supervisor positions. (5 CFR §315.904(b))
The requirements of this section, 315-1-60, also apply to HHS supervisor or (non-SES) manager positions in the excepted service, unless the provisions of the excepted authority authorizing the appointment (law, Executive Order, or regulation) specify differently.  These individuals serve supervisor or manager trial periods.
Employees who were serving or served in supervisory or managerial positions as of July 31, 1979, are exempt from the requirements in this section, 315-1-60, except in cases when a supervisor is assigned to a managerial position, the employee must complete a probation/trial period for managers (5 CFR §315.904(c)).
Creditable Time.
In accordance with 5 CFR §315.906:
A supervisor or manager who is reassigned, transferred, or promoted to another supervisory or managerial position while serving a supervisory or managerial probation or trial period, receives credit for service in the former supervisor or manager position.  Service credit is not transferable between manager and supervisor positions.
Service on detail, temporary promotion, or reassignment to another supervisory or managerial position while serving a probation or trial period is creditable toward completion of the probation or trial period.  Service in a nonsupervisory or non- managerial position is not creditable.
Prior service in a supervisory or managerial position via temporary appointment, promotion, or reassignment is creditable toward completion of a probation or trial period.  Prior service under a detail to a supervisory or managerial position is creditable only when the detail is made permanent without a break in service, following appropriate merit staffing procedures. Documented authorization must be approved by the OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Director or designee, in consultation with the probationer's supervisor.
Service during a supervisory or managerial probation/trial period from which an employee was separated or demoted for performance or conduct reasons is not creditable toward completion of a probation/trial period required under a subsequent appointment.  In situations where the individual did not complete probation through no fault of their own, service may be creditable on a case-by-case basis.  Documented authorization must be approved by the HR Director or designee, in consultation with the probationer's supervisor.
Service credit towards completion of a supervisory or managerial probation/trial period is transferable between competitive to excepted service supervisory or managerial positions, subject to the documented authorization of the HR Director or designee, in consultation with the probationer's supervisor, but not between excepted to competitive service supervisory or managerial positions.
If the supervisor or manager is new to the federal service and has not previously served an initial probationary period for non-temporary positions in the competitive service, the individual concurrently serves both the supervisory or managerial probationary and the initial probationary period. In accordance with 5 CFR §315.909(a), the initial probationary period takes precedence and completion of the initial probationary period fulfills the supervisory or managerial probation.
Absences in a non-pay status in excess of 22 workdays, except for periods of military duty or compensable injury, extend the probation or trial period by the amount equal to the time off on non-pay status.
Completion of Supervisory or Managerial Probation/Trial Period. The one (1) year supervisory or managerial probation/trial period ends when the employee completes his/her scheduled tour of duty on the day before the first (1st) anniversary date of the employee's appointment.
Failure to Satisfactorily Complete a Supervisory or Managerial Probation/Trial Period.
The consequence for failing to successfully complete the supervisory or managerial probation/trial period is the employee's removal from the supervisory or managerial position, but not necessarily termination.
If the probationer previously held a federal position and completed the initial-appointment probation/trial period, the employee is reassigned to the OpDiv/StaffDiv position (within the same service, competitive or excepted) at no lower grade and pay than the position previously held just prior to accepting the supervisory or managerial position, in accordance with 5 CFR §315.907(a) and this policy.  The employee must be notified in writing that he/she is being reassigned (5 CFR §315.907(c)).
A nonsupervisory or non-managerial employee who is demoted into a supervisory or managerial position subject to probation/trial period requirements identified under Section 315-1-60 A. above and then fails to complete the probation or trial period for performance reasons, is reassigned to a position at the same grade and pay as the supervisory or managerial position, in accordance with 5 CFR §315.907(b) and this policy.  The individual must be notified in writing that he/she is being reassigned (5 CFR §315.907(c)).
Supervisors or managers concurrently serving both the supervisory or managerial probationary period and the initial probationary period for competitive service positions, or supervisors or managers serving in a trial period who previously served in a non-temporary competitive service position, may have due process rights if they meet the definition of 'employee' under 5 U.S.C. §7511.
The OpDiv/StaffDiv's Employee Relations staff must be consulted prior to initiating any performance based or adverse action to ensure the requirements specified under 5 CFR Parts 432 and 752 are followed and the proposed action is legally supportable.  See also Section 315-1-70, Performance Based and Adverse Actions.
Federal Wage System (FWS) Supervisors.  OpDivs/StaffDivs shall consult their negotiated labor/management agreement(s) for rules covering probationary periods for FWS supervisors and establish internal procedures as necessary.
315-1-80  Performance Based and Adverse Actions
OpDiv/StaffDiv Employee Relations (ER) staff should be consulted as soon as performance or other issues surface.  ER staff must be consulted prior to taking a performance based or adverse action during a probation or trial period to ensure compliance with applicable federal laws and regulations and HHS policy.
Once an individual in either a competitive or excepted service position meets the definition of 'employee' under 5 U.S.C. §7511, they are generally entitled to advance written notice, an opportunity to respond to a proposed adverse action, and appeal rights to the MSPB.
Probationary employees may appeal a termination on the basis of discrimination or improper procedure, as described under 5 CFR §§315.805, 806, and 908.
315-1-90  Documentation and Accountability
Records, including all documentation sufficient for third party reconstruction purposes, must be retained according to the National Archives & Records Administration (NARA) record disposition schedule.
Records involved in litigation that are subject to a litigation hold must be preserved until an official litigation hold lift is received from OPM, Department of Justice, courts, the Office of the General Counsel, etc. that the matter has been fully litigated, or resolved, and closed.
ASA/OHR may conduct periodic accountability reviews to analyze compliance with this Instruction, HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and applicable federal laws and regulations.




























330-2
330-2: Priority Placement Programs (CTAP, ICTAP, RPL and PRL)
Material Transmitted:
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 330-2, Priority Placement Programs (CTAP, ICTAP, RPL, and PRL), dated 10/27/2022.

Material Superseded:
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 330-2, Priority Placement Programs (CTAP, ICTAP, RPL, and PRL), dated 06/01/2022.

Background:
This policy is revised to amend the CTAP and ICTAP exceptions (Appendixes A & B) by adding the competitive service college graduate and post-secondary hiring authorities to both lists consistent with 5 CFR Part 330, Subparts F and G.

This issuance is effective immediately and must be carried out by OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Centers in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, collective bargaining agreements, and Departmental policy.

/s/
Kimberly Steide

for/W. Robert Leavitt
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources
Chief Human Capital Officer

Subject: Priority Placement Programs
330-2-00 Purpose
330-2-10 References
330-2-20 Coverage
330-2-30 Definitions
330-2-40 Roles and Responsibilities
330-2-50 Career Transition Services
330-2-60 Career Transition Assistance Plan (CTAP)
330-2-70 Interagency Career Transition Assistance Plan (ICTAP)
330-2-80 Advertising Vacant Positions To Clear CTAP or ICTAP
330-2-90 Reemployment Priority List (RPL)
330-2-100 Priority Reemployment List (PRL)
330-2-110 RPL and PRL List Management
330-2-120 Documentation and Accountability

Appendix A: Exceptions to CTAP
Appendix B: Exceptions to ICTAP
Appendix C: Exceptions to RPL
Appendix D: Exceptions to PRL

330-2-00: Purpose
In accordance with 5 CFR Parts 302 and 330, this Instruction outlines the Department of Health and Human Service’s (Department or HHS) Priority Placement Programs (PPP) covering CTAP, ICTAP, RPL, and PRL. It outlines the career transition services available to eligible employees affected by downsizing, reorganization, restructuring, or other similar events. This policy should be used with the references listed in this Instruction.

When provisions of this policy differ from changes in applicable law or regulation, the changes in law or regulation apply.

330-2-10: References
5 CFR Part 302, Employment in the Excepted Service
5 CFR Part 330, Subpart A, Filling Positions in the Competitive Service
5 CFR Part 330, Subpart B, Reemployment Priority List (RPL)
5 CFR Part 330, Subpart F, Agency Career Transition Assistance Plan (CTAP)
5 CFR Part 330, Subpart G, Interagency Career Transition Assistance Plan (ICTAP)
5 CFR Part 351, Reduction in Force
5 CFR §353.110(b), Restoration to Duty from Compensable Injury
5 CFR Part 930, Subpart B, Administrative Law Judge Program
HHS Instruction 302-1, Employment in the Excepted Service
HHS Instruction 351-1, Reduction in Force
HHS Instruction 990-1, Workplace Flexibilities
HHS Instruction 1104-1, Delegated Examining Operations
330-2-20: Coverage and Exclusions
Coverage
The provisions of this Instruction apply to HHS competitive and certain excepted service employees who are eligible for priority selection under CTAP and ICTAP at grades GS-15 or below (or equivalent).
This Instruction also applies to current and/or former HHS employees eligible for priority reemployment consideration via the RPL (competitive service) or PRL (excepted service) programs.
Administrative Law Judges are covered in accordance with the regulations covering these positions.
Exclusions
This Instruction does not apply to Schedule C (political) excepted service employees or employees on time-limited appointments.
The provisions in this Instruction pertaining to conditions of employment for bargaining unit employees are fully negotiable in accordance with 5 U.S.C. Chapter 71, and any such actions may require notification to labor organizations when impacted employees are bargaining unit employees.  When the provisions of this Instruction differ from the requirements of any applicable Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA), the CBA takes precedence for bargaining unit employees.
330-2-30: Definitions
Agency. Executive agency, as defined in 5 U.S.C. 101 and 5 CFR Part 330.101 (i.e., HHS).
Career Transition Assistance Plan (CTAP). Provides eligible surplus and displaced HHS employees selection priority for HHS competitive service vacancies for which there are active recruitment actions.
Interagency Career Transition Assistance Plan (ICTAP). Provides eligible displaced HHS employees selection priority for competitive service vacancies at other Federal agencies and provides eligible displaced employees of other Federal agencies selection priority for HHS competitive service vacancies for which there are active recruitment actions.
Displaced Employee (under CTAP), see also Surplus Employee.
A current career or career-conditional (Tenure Group I or II) competitive service HHS employee, at GS-15 or below (or equivalent), who has received either a reduction in force (RIF) separation notice and has not declined an offer under RIF for a position with the same type of work schedule and the representative rate at least as high as the position from which the employee will be separated, or a notice of proposed removal for declining a directed geographic relocation outside the local commuting area (e.g., directed reassignment or change in duty location); or
A current excepted service HHS employee serving on an appointment without time limit, at grade GS-15 or below (or equivalent), who is on an excepted appointment providing noncompetitive conversion eligibility to a competitive service appointment, and who received a RIF separation notice or a notice of proposed removal for declining a directed geographic relocation outside the local commuting area (e.g., directed reassignment or change in duty location) (5 CFR §330.602).
Displaced Employee (under ICTAP).
A current or former career or career-conditional (Tenure Group I or II) competitive service employee at GS-15 or below (or equivalent) who has received either a RIF separation notice and did not decline an offer under RIF procedures for a position with the same type of work schedule and the representative rate at least as high as the position from which the employee will be separated, or a notice of proposed removal for declining a directed geographic relocation outside the local commuting area (e.g., directed reassignment or change in duty location), or has been separated by RIF procedures or removed for declining a geographic relocation outside the local commuting area;
A current or former excepted service employee serving on an appointment without time limit, at grade GS-15 or below (or equivalent), who is on an excepted appointment providing noncompetitive conversion eligibility to a competitive service appointment, and has received a RIF separation notice or a notice of proposed removal for declining a directed geographic relocation outside the local commuting area (e.g., directed reassignment or change in duty location), or has been separated by RIF procedures or removed for declining a geographic relocation outside the local commuting area;
A former career or career-conditional competitive service employee who was separated because of a compensable work-related injury or illness, whose compensation was terminated, and who has received certification from their former employing agency that it is unable to place the employee as required by 5 CFR Part 353;
A former career or career-conditional competitive service employee who retired with a disability annuity under 5 U.S.C. §§8337 or 8451 and has received notification from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) that the disability annuity has been or will be terminated; or
A former Military Reserve Technician or National Guard Technician receiving a special disability retirement annuity under 5 U.S.C. §§8337(h) or 8456 and who has certification of such annuity from the military department or National Guard Bureau (5 CFR §330.702).
Local Commuting Area. The geographic area usually constitutes one area for employment purposes, any population center (or two or more neighboring ones) and surrounding localities in which employees live and can be reasonably expected to travel back and forth daily to their place of employment (5 CFR §351.203).
Priority Placement Coordinator (PPC). Human resources professional(s) or division(s) within the Assistant Secretary for Administration, Office of Human Resources (ASA/OHR), who oversee all aspects of the Department-wide HHS Priority Placement Programs, including the RPL and PRL lists. Each OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Center will have its own PPC designated by the Human Resources Director, responsible for administering the day-to-day aspects of the programs for their serviced Operating Division/Staff Division (OpDiv/StaffDiv).
Priority Reemployment List (PRL). HHS’ PRL for excepted service employees provides reemployment consideration and placement assistance to former HHS excepted service employees who have been furloughed or separated by RIF or compensable injury; or who appealed an adverse action to the Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB) and were found to have been unjustifiably dismissed from the agency but is not entitled to immediate restoration under the MSPB’s decision (5 CFR §302.303).
Reemployment Priority List (RPL). HHS’ RPL for competitive service employees provides reemployment consideration and placement assistance to current and former HHS competitive service employees who have or will be separated by RIF or have fully recovered from a compensable injury after one (1) year (5 CFR §330.201).
Representative Rate. Generally, the fourth step of the grade under the General Schedule including locality rate. For a complete definition, see 5 CFR §351.203.
Surplus Employee (under CTAP).
A current career or career-conditional (Tenure Group I or II) HHS employee serving under an appointment in the competitive service, at grade GS-15 or below (or equivalent), who has received a Certificate of Expected Separation under RIF or other official certification issued by the Department/OpDiv/StaffDiv indicating that the HHS position is surplus (e.g., a notice of position abolishment, or that the employee is eligible for discontinued service retirement); or
A current HHS excepted service employee serving on an appointment without time limit, at grade GS-15 or below (or equivalent), who is on an excepted appointment providing noncompetitive conversion eligibility to a competitive service appointment and has received a Certificate of Expected Separation under RIF or other official certification issued by the Department/OpDiv/StaffDiv indicating that the position is surplus (e.g., a notice of position abolishment, or that the employee is eligible for discontinued service retirement) (5 CFR §330.602).
Well Qualified. A CTAP or ICTAP candidate who:
Meets the qualification standards and eligibility requirements for the position, including minimum educational and experience requirements; any medical qualifications, and suitability;
Meets any selective placement factors for the position established by the HR Center;
(For Vacancies Filled via Merit Promotion) Is rated above minimally qualified as defined through job analysis for the position being filled;
(For Vacancies Filled via Delegated Examining) Meets the definition of ‘Well Qualified’ as defined by the OpDiv/StaffDiv’s category rating procedures (HHS Instruction 1104-1, Delegated Examining Operations);
Is able to perform the essential duties of the position, with or without reasonable accommodation;
Meets any special qualifying condition(s) for the position (such as the ability to speak a specific language or other selective factors); and
Is able to perform the duties of the position upon entry satisfactorily.
330-2-40: Roles and Responsibilities
HHS Assistant Secretary for Administration, Office of Human Resources (ASA/OHR):
Develops Department-wide policy and guidance regarding priority placement and career transition assistance consistent with HHS and OPM policy and guidance and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Designates Departmental Priority Placement Coordinator(s) (PPC) to administer the HHS Priority Placement Programs (PPP) and provide program and HRIT oversight of the HHS-wide RPL and PRL lists, consistent with HHS policy and guidance, and applicable federal laws and regulations.
Periodically conducts accountability reviews of OpDiv/StaffDiv career transition and HHS PPP activities to ensure conformance with HHS and OPM policy and guidance and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Heads or their written designee(s):
Comply with applicable federal laws, regulations, and collective bargaining agreements covering career transition programs and services.
Provide resources to assist employees eligible for career transition services, in accordance with this Instruction and consultation with their servicing HR Center.
Ensure employees are advised of organizational actions that will adversely impact them as early as possible, and support authorizing excused absence to the extent practicable, so employee(s) can use available resources to find continuing employment.
OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Centers:
Comply with this Instruction, any HHS and OPM policy and guidance, collective bargaining agreements, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Provide career transition services to eligible employees in accordance with this Instruction, including providing reasonable accommodation to employees with disabilities, as appropriate.
Develop internal procedures to administer the HHS PPP within their serviced OpDiv/StaffDiv and to provide selection priority to employees and former employees.
Designate OpDiv/StaffDiv PPC(s) to administer the day-to-day aspects of the PPP for their serviced Division.
Coordinate priority placement program initiatives with other OpDivs/StaffDivs and other Federal, state, and local employers.
Resolve qualification disputes within their respective serviced Division and submit requests for dispute resolution between HR Centers to ASA/OHR for decision. The request for a decision may be submitted by the gaining or losing HR Center. Still, the request must contain a written assessment of the issues, relevant documentation, and a recommendation.
330-2-50: Career Transition Services
The following career transition services are provided to current HHS employees affected by downsizing, reorganization, restructuring, or other similar events, as required by 5 CFR §§330.603(c) and 330.608:

Employee Information. OpDivs/StaffDivs must provide its eligible employee’s written information on CTAP selection priority, including eligibility period; how to find and apply to vacancies, including proof of eligibility; and the HHS definition of ‘Well Qualified;’ within the following timeframes:
For RIF actions, OpDivs/StaffDivs must notify at least 60 full days before the effective date of the release unless OPM has approved an exception to an HHS request for a shorter notice period consistent with 5 CFR 351, Subpart H, and HHS Instruction 351-1, RIF.
For removal actions for declining a directed geographic relocation, HR Centers should consult their servicing labor/employee relations staff and provide written selection priority information at the earliest opportunity prior to removal, so the employee(s) can use available career transition services to find continuing employment.
Orientation Session. OpDivs/StaffDivs are required to provide a career transition ‘orientation session’ to its eligible employees with information on their eligibility for selection priority under HHS’ Priority Placement Programs and career transition services available. An orientation session may be in-person or web-based and includes the following:
Information on HHS’ RPL or PRL, as applicable, including eligibility period; how to register; MSPB appeal rights, etc. (See Sections 330-2-90 and 100 of this Instruction);
Information on ICTAP, including information on eligibility for selection priority for competitive service positions at other federal agencies, eligibility period, and how to find and apply to vacancies (See Section 330-2-70 of this Instruction);
Available excused absence for career transition-related activities;
Availability of equipment, facilities, materials, and resources, including for those with disabilities, in field offices, remote locations, etc.;
Federal, State, or local resources available to support career transition, including for those with disabilities;
Training or retraining opportunities via HHS Learning Management System, Department of Labor via state employment offices, or other public and private sector opportunities;
If the OpDiv/StaffDiv notifies Federal agencies in the local commuting area or provides employment referrals, give employees the option to authorize the release of their resume or other relevant employment information to public and private sector employers, as required by 5 CFR §351.803;
How to apply for State unemployment insurance benefits;
Estimate of severance pay (if eligible); and
Advise employees of their responsibility to notify their servicing HR Center of changes in their contact information and when they have received a valid job offer.
Use of Excused Absence. Each affected employee who requests excused absence may be granted up to 40 hours of administrative leave to use career transition assistance, including attending training or retaining opportunities; filling job applications; job interviews, etc. Additional time may be provided as warranted by individual situations, subject to supervisory approval and workload priorities. Interviews within HHS and the commuting area may be considered other official functions. OpDivs/StaffDivs may reimburse employees for travel expenses related to career transition activities. Supervisors should monitor the use of excused absence to ensure that time authorized is used for approved purposes.
Access to Services and Facilities. To the extent practicable and within available funding, surplus and displaced HHS employees are provided the following:
Skills assessment, resume preparation, job search assistance, and counseling, including information on the availability of the HHS Employee Assistance Program for stress, transition, and financial management.
Career transition services, equipment, facilities, materials, and resources to maximize placement opportunities.
Information on the availability of OpDiv/StaffDiv career transition services and facilities and how to access them, including any changes in the level and kind of services offered.
Access to facilities and career transition assistance for former employees for at least 90 days after the date of separation.
330-2-60: Career Transition Assistance Plan (CTAP)
Purpose. HHS’ Career Transition Assistance Plan (CTAP) covers surplus and displaced HHS employees per 5 CFR Part 330, Subpart F, and this Instruction. The program provides current HHS employees a way to transition into a vacant position within the Department if they will be separated, through no fault of their own, due to downsizing, reorganization, restructuring, or other similar events. CTAP candidates are given selection priority for vacancies within the local commuting area before other internal or external candidates are selected for vacancies (5 CFR §330.604).
Vacancy. When OpDivs/StaffDivs fill a permanent or time-limited competitive service position at GS- 15 (or equivalent) or below lasting 121 days or more (including extensions), HR Centers must give selection priority to CTAP candidates, unless the action is one of the exceptions listed in Appendix A of this Instruction.
CTAP Candidate. An HHS employee is given selection priority when they:
Meet the definition of ‘surplus’ or ‘displaced’ employee, as defined in Section 330-2-30;
Have a current performance rating of record of at least fully successful or equivalent;
Apply for a vacancy at or below the employee’s current grade level and without greater promotion potential than the position from which the employee occupies or may be separated;
Occupy a position in the same commuting area of the vacancy (see E.1.f. in this Section for exceptions);
Applying for a specific vacancy within the job opportunity announcement (JOA) open period, and provide proof of eligibility (i.e., one of the documents listed under the definition of displaced or surplus in this Instruction or 5 CFR §330.612); and
Meet the definition of ‘Well Qualified’ for the specific vacancy.
Period of Eligibility. The eligibility period begins on the date the HHS employee receives the RIF notice or notice of proposed removal and meets the definition of a surplus or displaced employee. It ends on the date one of the following occurs (5 CFR §§330.607(i) and 330.610):
Employee separates from HHS either voluntarily or involuntarily;
Employee receives a notice rescinding, canceling, or modifying the notice which gave the employee CTAP eligibility (so the employee no longer meets either the surplus or displaced definition);
Employee declines an offer of an HHS permanent appointment at any grade or pay level;
Employee is appointed to another HHS position at any grade or pay level, either permanent or time-limited before the employee is separated;
Employee is appointed to a career, career-conditional, or excepted service appointment without time limitation in another executive agency at any grade or pay level; or
Employee fails to reply to the OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Center within seven (7) business days to an offer of a permanent appointment at any grade or pay level.
Applying CTAP Selection Priority. In accordance with 5 CFR §§330.604, 330.605, 330.607, and 330.608:
Unless the personnel action is one of the exceptions listed in Appendix A of this Instruction, HR Centers must select an available CTAP candidate over any other applicant for a vacant position, if the position:
Is a permanent or time-limited competitive service position at GS-15 or below (or equivalent) to be filled for a total of 121 days or more, including all extensions;
Is at the grade or pay level with a representative rate no higher than the representative rate of the grade or pay level of the CTAP candidate’s permanent position of record;
Has no greater promotion potential than the CTAP candidate’s permanent position of record;
Is in the same local commuting area as the CTAP candidate’s permanent position of record (see f. immediately below for exceptions), and
Is filled during the CTAP eligible’s eligibility period.
When a position is advertised with a duty location as ‘Anywhere in the U.S.’ (or equivalent) or ‘Location is Negotiable After Selection, U.S.’ (for example, when a vacant position is designated as full-time remote or eligible for full-time remote work), selection priority must be given to all CTAP candidates, regardless of their official duty location. See also Section 330-2-80(D)(3), Advertising Positions.
OpDivs/StaffDivs may not procure contract support or other temporary help defined under 5 CFR Part 300, Subpart E until a determination is made that no CTAP candidate is available.
OpDivs/StaffDivs may not take the promotion and internal placement actions listed under 5 CFR §335.102 to place a permanent competitive service employee into a vacancy until a determination is made that no CTAP candidate is available.
HR Centers may appoint any CTAP candidate when two (2) or more qualified CTAP candidates apply for a vacancy. For example, the HR Center may provide an internal OpDiv/StaffDiv candidate with higher priority than another OpDiv/StaffDiv candidate.
HR Centers may provide CTAP selection priority to eligible employees from another commuting area after fulfilling its requirement to provide CTAP selection priority to candidates in the local commuting area.
Applicant Notification and Second-Level Review: All CTAP candidates who apply for a specific vacancy must be sent a written notice of the final status of their application, including whether the candidate was determined to be ‘Well Qualified;’ if another CTAP candidate was hired; if the vacancy was filled under one of the exceptions listed in Appendix A; or if the recruitment was canceled. Additionally, if the candidate was determined not well-qualified, the HR Center must conduct a second-level review by another HR Specialist, document the job-related reasons for the determination, and notify such CTAP candidates of the results of the independent second-level review.
CTAP obligations must be cleared at the initial announcement. See Section 330-2-80, Advertising Vacant Positions.
After the OpDiv/StaffDiv announces the vacancy in USAStaffing and meets its obligation to any CTAP candidate(s) who applied to the announcement, the HR Center may fill the vacant position with a permanent HHS competitive service candidate, following appropriate merit staffing procedures.
Order of selection when filling vacancies open to HHS candidates:
CTAP
All other internal HHS candidates
Before filling a vacant competitive service position with an external candidate (outside of HHS’ permanent competitive service workforce), the OpDiv/StaffDiv must also apply the requirements of ICTAP and RPL (See Sections 330-2-70 and 90 of this Instruction).
330-2-70: Interagency Career Transition Assistance Plan (ICTAP)
Purpose. The Interagency Career Transition Assistance Plan (ICTAP) covers displaced federal employees per 5 CFR Part 330, Subpart G, and this Instruction. The program provides federal employees a way to transition into a vacant competitive service position in another federal agency if they have been separated, through no fault of their own, as a result of downsizing, reorganization, restructuring, or other similar events.
Vacancy. When OpDivs/StaffDivs accept applicants from outside HHS’ competitive service workforce to fill a permanent or time-limited competitive service position at GS-15 (or equivalent) or below lasting 121 days or more (including extensions), HR Centers must give selection priority to ICTAP candidates who apply to the vacancy, unless the action is one of the exceptions listed in Appendix B of this Instruction.
ICTAP Candidate. A federal employee is given selection priority when they:
Meet the definition of ‘displaced’ employee, as defined in Section 330-2-30;
Have a current performance rating of record of at least fully successful or equivalent;
Apply for a vacancy at or below the employee’s current grade level and without greater promotion potential than the position from which the employee occupied or may be separated;
Occupy a position in the same commuting area of the vacancy (see E.1.f. in this Section for exceptions);
Submit an application for a specific vacancy within the JOA open period, and provide proof of eligibility (i.e., one of the documents listed under the definition of displaced in this Instruction or 5 CFR §330.710); and
Meet the definition of ‘Well Qualified’ for the specific vacancy.
Future selection priority for positions previously obtained via ICTAP is not given if the federal employee was terminated or removed from that position for performance or conduct-based actions under 5 CFR Parts 432 and 752.
Period of Eligibility. The eligibility period begins on the date the federal employee meets the definition of displaced employee, and it ends on one of the following dates (5 CFR §330.708):
One (1) year from the date of:
Separation by RIF;
Removal for declining a geographic relocation outside the local commuting area;
Federal agency certification that it cannot place the employee (5 CFR Part 353); or
OPM notification that the employee’s disability annuity has, or will be, terminated.
Two (2) years from the date of RIF separation for persons eligible for positions restricted to preference eligibles (5 CFR Part 330, Subpart D).
On the date the ICTAP candidate:
Receives a notice rescinding, canceling, or modifying the notice which gave the employee ICTAP eligibility (so the employee no longer meets the displaced definition);
Separates for any reason before the RIF or removal effective date;
Is appointed to a career, career-conditional, or excepted service appointment without time limitation in any executive agency at any grade or pay level;
Declines an offer of a permanent appointment at any grade or pay level; or
Fails to reply within seven (7) business days to an offer or official availability inquiry for a permanent appointment at any grade or pay level.
OPM may extend the above eligibility periods due to administrative or procedural errors.
ICTAP eligibility for former Military Reserve or National Guard Technicians ends when the technician no longer receives the special disability retirement annuity (See Section 330-2-30, Displaced Employee (under ICTAP)).
Applying ICTAP Selection Priority. In accordance with 5 CFR §§330.703, 330.705 and 330.706:
Unless the personnel action is one of the exceptions listed in Appendix B of this Instruction, HR Centers must select an available ICTAP candidate over any other external candidate (outside of HHS’ permanent competitive service workforce) for a vacant position, if the position:
Is a permanent or time-limited competitive service position at GS-15 or below (or equivalent) to be filled for a total of 121 days or more, including all extensions;
Is at the grade or pay level with a representative rate no higher than the representative rate of the grade or pay level of the ICTAP eligible’s current or last permanent position of record;
Has no greater promotion potential than the ICTAP eligible’s current or last permanent position of record;
Is in the same local commuting area as the ICTAP eligible’s current or last permanent position of record (see f. immediately below for exceptions), and
Is filled during the ICTAP eligible’s eligibility period.
When a position is advertised with a duty location as ‘Anywhere in the U.S.’ (or equivalent) or ‘Location is Negotiable After Selection, U.S.’ (for example, when a vacant position is designated as full-time remote or eligible for full-time remote work), selection priority must be given to all ICTAP candidates, regardless of their official duty location. See also Section 330-2-80(D)(3), Advertising Positions.
HR Centers may not procure contract support or other temporary help defined under 5 CFR Part 300, Subpart E until a determination is made that no ICTAP candidate is available.
HR Centers may appoint any ICTAP candidate when two (2) or more qualified ICTAP candidates apply for a vacancy.
Applicant Notification and Second-Level Review: All ICTAP candidates who apply for a specific vacancy must be sent a written notice of the final status of their application, including whether the candidate was determined to be ‘Well Qualified;’ if another ICTAP candidate was hired; if the vacancy was filled under one of the exceptions listed in Appendix B; or if the recruitment was canceled. Additionally, if the candidate was determined not well qualified, the HR Center must conduct a second-level review by another HR Specialist and document the job-related reasons for the determination; and notify such ICTAP candidates with the results of the independent second-level review.
ICTAP obligations must be cleared at the initial announcement. See Section 330-2-80, Advertising Vacant Positions.
After the OpDiv/StaffDiv announces the vacancy in USAStaffing and meets its obligations to any CTAP or ICTAP candidate(s) who applied to the delegated examining announcement and qualified RPL registrant(s) on the HHS RPL, the HR Center may fill the vacant position with any other external candidate who applied to the vacancy, following appropriate delegated examining procedures (See Sections 330-2-60 and 90 of this Instruction).
Order of selection when filling vacancies open to candidates outside HHS:
CTAP
RPL
ICTAP
All other external candidates
330-2-80: Advertising Vacant Positions to Clear CTAP or ICTAP
HHS CTAP candidates must have access to information on all HHS vacant positions in their local commuting area, in accordance with 5 CFR §330.608(c).
A vacant position is a permanent or time-limited competitive service position at GS-15 or below (or equivalent) to be filled for a total of 121 days or more, including all extensions.
All HHS vacant positions are posted on USAStaffing, in accordance with 5 CFR Part 330, Subpart A, unless the position is filled via an exception listed in Appendix A or B.
All JOAs must contain (5 CFR §330.104):
The HHS definition of ‘Well Qualified’ in this Instruction; and
Require the following documentation to show proof of CTAP/ICTAP eligibility:
Accepting HHS candidates (internal to OpDiv/StaffDiv or HHS-wide): ‘Provide one of the following documents: A copy of your RIF separation notice or notice of position abolishment; notice of proposed removal for declining a directed reassignment or change in duty location; or official notice stating you are eligible for discontinued service retirement.’
Accepting candidates outside HHS: ‘Provide one of the following documents: A copy of the your RIF separation notice or notice of position abolishment; notice of proposed removal for declining a directed reassignment or change in duty location; official notice stating you are eligible for discontinued service retirement; agency certification that it cannot place you after your recovery from a compensable work-related injury or illness; official military notice stating you are eligible for a special disability retirement for Military Reserve or National Guard technicians; or notice from OPM stating your disability retirement annuity has been or will be terminated.’
‘A copy of your most recent SF-50 "Notification of Personnel Action'', showing position title, series, grade level, and duty location;’ and
‘A copy of your latest performance appraisal including your official rating.’
Remote Work (as defined in OPM’s 2021 Guide on Telework and Remote Work in the Federal Government - PDF and HHS Instruction 990-1, Workplace Flexibilities).
When advertising a full-time remote position or a position eligible for full-time remote work (i.e., the employee works at an approved alternate worksite with no expectation to report to the agency worksite on a regular or recurring basis), the duty location is ‘Anywhere in the U.S.’ or ‘Location is Negotiable After Selection, U.S.’ In addition to (2)(a)-(d) above, the JOA must inform applicants the position being filled has been designated as/is remote.
In cases where there is some frequency in which the position requires an onsite presence (e.g., the employee reports to the agency worksite less than 2 days per bi-weekly pay period, or on an irregular but consistent basis, etc.), the vacancy should be advertised with the duty location of the agency worksite, and CTAP/ICTAP is cleared for the advertised official duty location.
If a hiring official wants to make selection(s) for full-time remote work from an announcement that was advertised with specific duty location(s) (e.g., Washington, DC; or Seattle, WA and Denver, CO), the vacancy must be readvertised with a duty location of ‘Anywhere in the U.S.’ (or equivalent) or ‘Location is Negotiable After Selection, U.S.’ to give all eligible candidates the opportunity to apply.
Hiring officials should be advised that the duty location of employees appointed via the competitive service cannot be changed within 90 days of appointment from the location advertised in the vacancy announcement, consistent with the merit system principle of fair and open competition (5 CFR §330.502). OPM may waive this regulatory restriction upon written request from the ASA/OHR if the OpDiv/StaffDiv can justify an urgent need (e.g., an unforeseen/emergency situation arising in the new duty location including an explanation why another employee cannot be utilized, or an emergency situation on the part of the employee the OpDiv/StaffDiv is seeking to accommodate, etc.). Such requests must be submitted by the HR Center to employmentpolicy@hhs.gov.
CTAP/ICTAP/RPL obligations must be cleared at initial announcement. Additional clearance requirements may be specified in HHS Instruction, 300-2, Shared Certificates Program, when using shared certificates.
330-2-90:  Reemployment Priority List (RPL)
Purpose. HHS’ Reemployment Priority List (RPL) covers competitive service employees, in accordance with 5 CFR Part 330, Subpart B, and this Instruction. The RPL provides selection priority to current and former HHS competitive service employees who will be/were separated under RIF, or who have recovered from a compensable work-related injury after more than one (1) year.

An HHS-wide RPL will be established for each commuting area in which OpDivs/StaffDivs have RPL eligibles. HHS OpDivs/StaffDivs within the same commuting area use a single RPL and must give selection priority to RPL eligibles for most permanent or time-limited competitive service positions before hiring outside HHS’ permanent competitive service workforce, unless the action is one of the exceptions listed in Appendix C of this Instruction.
RPL Eligible. In accordance with 5 CFR §§330.201 and 203:

For RPL eligibility under 5 CFR Part 351(RIF):
A current HHS competitive service employee in Tenure Group I or II with a RIF separation notice or a Certificate of Expected Separation under RIF; or
A former HHS competitive service employee in Tenure Group I or II separated by RIF;
Has received a performance rating of record of at least fully successful or equivalent as their most recent performance rating; and
Has not declined an offer of employment under RIF (5 CFR 351, Subpart G) with the same type of work schedule and with a representative rate at least as high as the position from which the employee will be separated. OR
For RPL eligibility under 5 CFR Part 353 (restoration to duty from compensable injury):
A former HHS competitive service employee fully recovered from a compensable injury (described under 5 CFR Part 353) more than 1 year after compensation began;
Serving in or separated from an appointment in the competitive service in Tenure Group I or II;
Either accepted a position at a lower grade or pay level in lieu of separation or was separated because of a compensable injury or disability; and
Received notification from the Department of Labor that injury compensation benefits have ended or will end.
Registration.
Timeframe. Employees who are eligible for the RPL must register within the following timeframes, in accordance with 5 CFR §330.206:
On or before the RIF separation date, or
Within 30 days after the date of injury compensation benefits stop; or the date Department of Labor denies an appeal for continuation of injury compensation benefits.
Positions. In accordance with 5 CFR §§330.204(d), 330.205, 330.207 and 330.212:
Employees must submit information to their servicing HR Center within the registration timeframe specifying the positions and conditions they will accept, including occupation(s), series, grade(s), work schedule (full-time, part-time, seasonal, or intermittent), and minimum hours of work per week.
Employees may register for positions within the local commuting area, and at the same pay level with a representative rate no higher than the position from which the registrant was/will be separated.
RPL eligibles may specify conditions they will accept, including:
Additional occupation(s) and series;
Grades lower than the position from which the registrant was/will be separated;
Work schedules (full-time, part-time, seasonal, or intermittent);
Minimum hours of work per week, as applicable, and
Specific OpDivs/StaffDivs within same local commuting area in which registered.
HHS employees who have fully recovered from a compensable injury after one (1) year may register for positions in another commuting area, upon request, if there is an existing RPL for requested area. The HR Center PPC must confirm that the requested commuting area is available in the HHS HRIT system prior to permitting this option. Requests to register for positions HHS-wide are not permitted.
If an RPL eligible agreed to transfer with their function under RIF but will be separated by RIF from the new position, registration is limited to the RPL for the new local commuting area.
If an RPL eligible was/will be, separated from an overseas position appointed via 5 CFR Part 301, registration is limited to the local commuting area where the employee was/will be separated, unless the OpDiv/StaffDiv approves a written request from the RPL eligible to register for another area within the U.S. that is mutually acceptable to both the employee and the Division.
Registration Form. HR Centers may develop a form for employees to use, request employees to include the position information on their resumes, or require the information be submitted in some other format. These instructions must be provided to employees during the orientation session described in Section 330-2-50 of this Instruction, or when the HR Center issues a RIF separation notice or Certification of Expected Separation under RIF; when the employee accepts a lower grade or pay level; or is separated because of a compensable work-related injury.
Application Guidance. HR Centers must be available to provide RPL eligibles guidance on how to register and help identify the positions for which they are eligible and qualified.
RPL Eligibility Period. In accordance with 5 CFR §§330.208 and 330.209, eligibility expires:
Two (2) years from either the date of the RIF separation, or the date the former employee is registered on the RPL due to recovery from a compensable work-related injury; or
On the date the RPL registrant is removed from the list for one of the following reasons:
Registrants are removed from the RPL at all registered grades and pay levels if:
The registrant declines or fails to reply to an offer of a career, career-conditional, or excepted appointment position without time limit, with the same work schedule and pay level with a representative rate at least as high as the position from which the registrant was or will be separated (see D.2.c. below for required evidence);
Receives a written cancellation, rescission, or modification to a RIF separation notice or Certification of Expected Separation so the employee no longer meets the conditions of a RPL registrant, or an injury compensation benefit notice stating the employee continues to receive injury compensation benefits;
Separates from HHS for any other reason (such as retirement, resignation, or interagency transfer) before the RIF separation effective date. Registration continues if the registrant retires on or after the RIF separation effective date. This reason for removal does not apply to registrants eligible due to a compensable injury;
Requests their servicing HR Center to remove their name from the RPL;
Is placed in a position without time limit at any grade or pay level within HHS; or
Is placed in a position via a career, career-conditional, or excepted appointment without time limit at any grade or pay level in any federal agency.
Registrants are removed from the RPL at lower registered grades or pay levels than the last grade or pay level held, if the offered position is below the last grade or pay level held and the registrant:
Declines or fails to reply to an offer of a career, career-conditional, or excepted appointment without time limit for a position meeting acceptable conditions identified by registrant; or
Declines or fails to reply to a scheduled interview. (See D.2.c. below for required evidence.)

These registrants remain on the RPL for positions with a representative rate higher than the offered position up to the grade and pay level last held until their eligibility expires or otherwise terminates.
Required Evidence for RPL Removal: Evidence must be maintained by the HR Center for any reason for removal. To remove an individual because of a failure to reply to a specific permanent job offer or an inquiry of availability for a specific permanent vacancy, evidence is required showing the offer, inquiry, or scheduled interview was made in writing and clearly stated that failure to reply will result in removal from the RPL for the grades and pay levels specified under reasons above (5 CFR §330.204(f)).
Declination of a time-limited appointment does not affect RPL eligibility.
OPM may extend the registration period based on a request from either HHS or the RPL eligible when a RPL eligible does not receive a full 2 years of placement priority due to administrative or procedural error. Extension requests must describe the error. HR Centers who receive such a request from an employee should forward it to the ASA/OHR PPC for OPM approval. OPM’s decision is not subject to appeal (5 CFR §330.208(b)).
Applying RPL Selection Priority. In accordance with 5 CFR §§330.202, 330.210, and 330.213:
Unless the personnel action is one of the exceptions listed in Appendix C of this Instruction, HR Centers must select qualified RPL registrants for competitive service vacancies before hiring outside HHS’ permanent competitive service workforce when:
The position is permanent or time limited to be filled by a competitive service appointment; and
There are RPL eligibles registered for the position at the grade or pay level and commuting area of the vacant position. (If the position is available at multiple grade levels, RPL applies at the grade or pay level in which the position is filled.)
When the position has been advertised with a duty location as ‘Anywhere in the U.S. (or equivalent) or ‘Location is Negotiable After Selection, U.S.’, HR Centers must give selection priority to all qualified RPL eligibles registered for the position at the grade or pay level, regardless of their official duty location.
Covered actions include new appointments, reinstatements, reemployment, and transfers as defined in 5 CFR §210.102; conversions as defined in OPM’s Guide to Processing Personnel Actions (5 CFR §330.202); and appointments under a noncompetitive appointing authority (5 CFR §330.210(c)).
HR Centers use category rating procedures to evaluate RPL eligibles separately from other candidates, in accordance with HHS Instruction 1104-1, Delegated Examining Operations.
The HHS RPL must be checked at initial announcement. See Section 330-2-110, RPL and PRL List Management.
Order of selection when filling vacancies open to candidates outside HHS:
CTAP
RPL
ICTAP
All other external candidates
HR Centers must document if there are no RPL eligibles for a vacancy when issuing a certificate.
RPL registrants have appeal rights to the MSPB if they believe their reemployment rights were violated, in accordance with 5 CFR §330.214.
330-2-100: Priority Reemployment List (PRL)
Purpose. The HHS’ Priority Reemployment List covers former excepted service employees, in accordance with 5 CFR §§302.303 and 302.304(a) and this Instruction. The PRL provides selection priority to former HHS excepted service employees, who are subject to the provisions of Title 5, United States Code (U.S.C.), and who were furloughed or separated under RIF or compensable injury; or received an MSPB decision based on an appeal of an adverse action, where the MSPB found the employee was unjustifiably dismissed but is not entitled to immediate restoration under the MSPB’s decision.

An HHS-wide PRL will be established for each commuting area and excepted service authority in which OpDivs/StaffDivs have PRL eligibles. HHS OpDivs/StaffDivs within the same commuting area use a single PRL for each excepted service authority and must give selection priority to qualified PRL eligibles for excepted service positions before referring other excepted service candidates for consideration (5 CFR §302.304(a)), unless the action is one of the exceptions listed in Appendix D of this Instruction.

HHS does not elect to establish a Reemployment List (RL) in accordance with 5 CFR 302.303(c) and HHS Instruction 302-1, Employment in the Excepted Service.
PRL Eligible. In accordance with 5 CFR §§302.303 and 302.304(a):
Former HHS excepted service employees, both preference eligible and non-preference eligible, who have been furloughed or separated under RIF without delinquency or misconduct from an excepted service appointment without time limit; and
Received a performance rating of record of at least fully successful or equivalent as their most recent performance rating; and
Have not declined an offer of employment under RIF (5 CFR 351, Subpart G) with the same type of work schedule and with a representative rate at least as high as the position from which the employee was separated.
Former HHS excepted service employees who are preference eligible, and who, as the result of an appeal under 5 CFR Part 752, are found by the MSPB to have been unjustifiably dismissed from HHS but are not entitled to immediate restoration by the MSPB decision; or
Former HHS excepted service employees fully recovered from a compensable injury (described under 5 CFR Part 353) more than 1 year after the date compensation began.
Former employees in positions exempt from the 5 CFR Part 302 appointment procedures and listed under 5 CFR §302.101(c), such as attorneys, are included in B.1-3. above.
Registration.
Timeframe. Employees who are eligible for the PRL must register within the following timeframes:
On or before the separation date; or
Within 30 days after the date of injury, compensation benefits stop; or the date the Department of Labor denies an appeal for continuation of injury compensation benefits in accordance with 5 CFR §353.301(b).
Positions.
Employees must submit information to their servicing HR Center within the registration timeframe specifying the positions and conditions they will accept, including occupation(s), series, grades, work schedule (full-time, part-time, seasonal, or intermittent), and minimum hours of work per week.
Employees may register for positions within the local commuting area at the same pay level with a representative rate no higher than the position from which the registrant was separated, with the following exceptions (5 CFR §302.303(b)(2-3)):
Former employees who were furloughed or separated due to a compensable injury and who are not entitled to immediate restoration may also register for location(s) where vacancies are available if a vacancy is unlikely to occur where the former employee last served during his/her period of reemployment priority;
Former employees whom MSPB finds to have been unjustly dismissed are considered/registered outside the commuting area from which they were separated if the MSBP decision specifies a broader or different geographic location.
PRL eligibles may specify conditions they will accept, including:
Additional occupation(s) and series;
Grades lower than the position from which the registrant was/will be separated;
Work schedules (full-time, part-time, seasonal, or intermittent);
Minimum hours of work per week, as applicable, and
Specific OpDivs/StaffDivs within the same local commuting area registered.
If a PRL eligible agrees to transfer with their function under RIF but will be separated by RIF from the new position, registration is limited to the PRL for the new local commuting area.
Registration Form. HR Centers may develop a form for employees to use, request that they include the position information on their resumes, or require the information be submitted in another format. These instructions must be provided to employees during the orientation session described in Section 330-2-50 of this Instruction or when the HR Center issues a separation notice or Certification of Expected Separation under RIF; the employee accepts a lower grade or pay level; or is separated from the agency because of a compensable work-related injury.
Application Guidance. HR Centers must be available to provide PRL eligibles guidance on how to register and help identify the positions for which they are eligible and qualified.
PRL Eligibility Period. In accordance with 5 CFR §302.303, eligibility expires:
Two (2) years from either the date of separation or the date the former employee is registered on the PRL due to recovery from a compensable work-related injury; or
On the date the PRL registrant is removed from the PRL for one of the following reasons:
Is placed in a position without a time limit;
Withdraws from consideration, or declines an offer of excepted appointment without time limit; or
Fails to reply to an inquiry concerning a specific position having a representative rate at least as high, and with the same type of work schedule, as the position from which the person was separated.
Required Evidence for PRL Removal: Evidence must be maintained by the HR Center for any reason for removal. When an individual is removed from the PRL because of a failure to reply to a specific permanent job offer or an inquiry of availability for a specific permanent vacancy, evidence is required showing the offer, inquiry, or scheduled interview was made in writing and clearly stated that failure to reply would result in removal from the PRL.
Declination of a time-limited appointment does not affect PRL eligibility.
Applying PRL Selection Priority.
Unless the personnel action is one of the exceptions listed in Appendix D of this Instruction, HR Centers must select qualified PRL registrants for excepted service vacancies if the position:
Is permanent or time-limited to be filled by an excepted service appointment; and
There are PRL eligibles registered for the position at the grade or pay level. (If the  position is available at multiple grade levels, PRL applies at the grade or pay level in which the position is filled.)
HR Centers must consider all qualified registrants on HHS’ PRL for the commuting area and excepted service authority of the position to be filled before referring the names of other qualified excepted service candidates (5 CFR §§302.303(d) and 302.304(a)).
When candidates are being considered for a vacant position from anywhere in the U.S. (or equivalent) or the duty location is negotiable after selection, HR Centers must give selection priority to all qualified PRL eligibles registered for the position at the grade or pay level, regardless of their official duty location, before referring the names of other qualified excepted service candidates.
HR Centers follow the assessment and selection procedures described in HHS Instruction 302-1, Employment in the Excepted Service (Section 302-1-80) to evaluate PRL eligibles separately from other candidates.
HR Centers may appoint a candidate who is not PRL eligible, or a PRL eligible who has a lower standing on the PRL list when the PRL eligible(s) qualifications will create an undue interruption to the position. The HR Center must notify each PRL eligible of the reasons for non-selection and must also notify any preference eligible(s) on the PRL list of their right to appeal to the MSPB (5 CFR §302.304(a)). This documentation must be maintained in the recruitment case file.
Once an HR Center fulfills these PRL requirements, other excepted service candidates may be considered for the position following the assessment and selection procedures described in HHS Instruction 302-1, Employment in Excepted Service.
HR Centers must retain sufficient documentation to demonstrate PRL clearance for each excepted service vacancy.
Individuals entitled to priority consideration who are preference eligibles, or suffered a compensable injury, have appeal rights to the MSPB if they believe their reemployment rights were violated (5 CFR §§302.304(a) and 302.501).
330-2-110: RPL and PRL List Management
HHS Priority Placement Programs (PPP) lists include the Reemployment Priority List (RPL) and Priority Reemployment List (PRL) and are available via an HHS HRIT system.
ASA/OHR and OpDiv/StaffDiv PPCs will have access to the HHS HRIT system to oversee and manage the lists.
ASA/OHR oversees all Department-wide PPP programs, including the RPL and PRL lists; resolves issues or disputes among two or more HR Centers; establishes new lists, and periodically reviews lists to ensure registrants meet eligibility requirements.
An HHS-wide RPL will be established by the ASA/OHR for each commuting area in which OpDivs/StaffDivs have RPL-eligible competitive service employees. All OpDivs/StaffDivs within the same commuting area use a single RPL. They are responsible for clearing the HHS PRL at initial announcement before hiring outside HHS’ permanent competitive service workforce.
An HHS-wide PRL will be established by the ASA/OHR for each commuting area and excepted service authority in which OpDivs/StaffDivs have PRL-eligible excepted service employees. All OpDivs/StaffDivs within the same commuting area use a single PRL for each excepted service authority and are responsible for clearing the HHS PRL when filling excepted service positions.
Each OpDiv/StaffDiv PPC is responsible for administering the day-to-day aspects of the PPP lists for their serviced OpDiv/StaffDiv, including:
Tracking employees eligible for RPL or PRL priority selection for their serviced division to ensure their employees receive the career transition services described in this Instruction.
Notifying the ASA/OHR when a new list(s) described under D. and E. above needs to be established based on employee eligibility within their serviced division.
Entering RPL and PRL registrants on lists no later than ten calendar days after receiving the information/application, the employee was or will be separated by the local commuting area. All OpDivs/StaffDivs within the same local commuting area use a single RPL and/or PRL.
In addition, PRL registrants are entered on the PRL list(s) by the excepted service appointing authority from which the employee was separated or last served (i.e., there may be more than 1 PRL within a local commuting area if HHS excepted employees serving on different excepted authorities are eligible for reemployment consideration).
Entering the employee’s eligibility period, i.e., qualifying event date and expiration date.
Entering the conditions under which the HHS employee will accept reemployment, i.e., occupation(s), series, grades, work schedule (full-time, part-time, seasonal, or intermittent), and minimum hours of work per week, as applicable.
Making any necessary changes, such as an updated resume, conditions, contact information, etc., provided by the employee within ten calendar days of receipt. Updated qualifications or conditions for accepting positions apply to vacancies after the HR Center updates the RPL/PRL candidate’s information (i.e., ten calendar days after receipt).
Clearing the HHS RPL and PRL, as applicable, when filling vacancies.
Removing their division’s RPL and PRL registrants from the list(s) when the registrants’ eligibility expires.
Ensuring documentation is maintained in recruitment case files showing the OpDiv/StaffDiv has met its RPL or PRL selection priority requirements sufficient for third-party reconstruction.
Resolving qualification disputes within their respective serviced division and submitting requests for dispute resolution between HR Centers to the ASA/OHR for decision. The request for a decision may be submitted by the gaining or losing HR Center. Still, the request must contain a written assessment of the issues, relevant documentation, and a recommendation.
CTAP and ICTAP. The CTAP and ICTAP regulations require candidates to apply for a specific vacancy to receive priority consideration.
HR Centers must track surplus and displaced employees for their serviced division to ensure its employees who are eligible for CTAP and ICTAP receive the career transition services described in this Instruction.
HR Centers ensure documentation is maintained in recruitment case files showing that OpDiv/StaffDiv has met its CTAP/ICTAP selection priority requirements sufficient for third-party reconstruction.
HR Centers must notify OpDiv/StaffDiv PPCs, with supporting documentation, when a CTAP candidate is no longer eligible for further priority consideration. For example, if the CTAP candidate who is employed at FDA declines a CDC job offer, the CDC PPC will notify FDA PPC. The employing office PPC will then notify the CTAP candidate that their CTAP eligibility has ended and the basis for it. (See Section 330-2-60, Period of Eligibility, for events that end CTAP eligibility.)
330-2-120: Documentation and Accountability
Records associated with meeting CTAP, ICTAP, RPL, and PRL selection priority requirements, including documentation sufficient for third-party reconstruction purposes, must be retained according to the record disposition schedule. Generally, all records created in a given year must be retained for a total of three (3) full years. Records involved in litigation and grievance processes may be destroyed only after official notification from OPM, Department othe f Justice, courts, the Office of the General Counsel, etc. that the matter has been fully litigated, resolved, and closed.
ASA/OHR may conduct periodic accountability reviews to analyze compliance with this Instruction, HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Appendix A: Exceptions to CTAP Selection (5 CFR §330.609)
An OpDiv/StaffDiv may take the following actions as exceptions to CTAP selection:

Reemploy a former HHS employee with regulatory or statutory reemployment rights, including the reemployment of an injured worker who either has been restored to earning capacity by the Office of Workers' Compensation Programs, Department of Labor, or has received a notice that his or her compensation benefits will cease because of full recovery from the disabling injury or illness;
Detail an HHS employee;
Appoint an individual for a period limited to 120 or fewer days, including all extensions;
Appoint an individual under an excepted service appointing authority;
Promote an employee for a period limited to 120 or fewer days, including all extensions;
Promote an employee to the next higher grade or pay level of a designated career ladder position;
Reassign employees between or among positions in the local commuting area when there is no change in grade or promotion potential and no actual vacancy results;
Reassign or demote an employee based on performance or adverse action (5 CFR Parts 432 or 752);
Convert an employee currently serving under an appointment providing noncompetitive conversion eligibility to a competitive service appointment, including a/n
Veterans Recruitment Appointment (VRA) under 5 CFR Part 307;
30% or More Disabled Veteran appointment under 5 CFR Part 316;
Excepted service appointment under 5 CFR Part 213; or
A post-secondary student appointment under 5 U.S.C. 3116 and 5 CFR 316, Subpart I.
A position change of an employee into a different position as a result of a formal reorganization, as long as the former position ceases to exist and no actual vacancy results;
A Reduction in Force (RIF) action under 5 CFR Part 351;
Intergovernmental Personnel Act (IPA) under 5 U.S.C. Chapter 33, Subchapter VI, or the Information Technology Exchange Program under 5 U.S.C. Chapter 37;
A position change of an employee within the excepted service;
A position change of a surplus or displaced employee in the local commuting area;
A position change of an employee resulting from a reclassification action (such as accretion of duties or action resulting from the application of new position classification standards);
A position change of an employee under 5 U.S.C. 8337 or 8451 to allow continued employment of an employee who is unable to provide useful and efficient service in his or her current position because of a medical condition;
A position change of an injured or disabled employee to a position in which he or she can be reasonably accommodated;
A position change of an employee to a position that constitutes a reasonable offer as defined in 5 U.S.C. 8336(d) and 8414(b);
Recall a seasonal or intermittent employee from non-pay status;
A personnel action pursuant to the settlement of a formal complaint, grievance, appeal, or other litigation;
Reassign or demote an employee under 5 CFR §315.907 of this chapter for failure to complete a supervisory or managerial probationary period;
Retain an individual whose position is brought into the competitive service under a term appointment (5 CFR Part 316) and convert that individual to career or career-conditional appointment, when applicable via 5 CFR Part 315;
Retain an employee covered by an OPM-approved variation (5 CFR 5.1);
Reemploy a former HHS employee who retired under a formal trial retirement and reemployment program and who requests reemployment under the program's provisions and applicable time limits;
Extend a time-limited promotion or appointment up to the maximum period allowed (including any OPM-approved extensions beyond the regulatory limit on the time-limited promotion or appointment) if the original action was made subject to CTAP selection priority and the original announcement or notice stated that the promotion or appointment could be extended without further announcement;
Transfer an employee between federal agencies under appropriate authority during an interagency reorganization, interagency transfer of function, or interagency mass transfer;
Appoint a member of the Senior Executive Service into the competitive service under 5 U.S.C. 3594
Transfer an employee voluntarily from one federal agency to another under a Memorandum of Understanding or similar agreement under appropriate authority resulting from an interagency reorganization, interagency transfer of function, or interagency mass transfer when both the agencies and the affected employee agree to the transfer;
Reassign an employee whose position description or other written mobility agreement provides for reassignment outside the commuting area as part of a planned HHS rotational program;
Transfer or a position change of an employee under a supervisory, management, or executive development program (5 CFR Part 412);
Convert an employee's time-limited appointment in the competitive or excepted service to a permanent appointment in the competitive service if the employee accepted the time-limited appointment while a CTAP eligible;
Make an appointment using the college graduate hiring authority under 5 U.S.C. 3115 and 5 CFR Part 315.614; or
Make an appointment using the post-secondary student hiring authority under 5 U.S.C. 3116 and 5 CFR 316, Subpart I.
Appendix B: Exceptions to ICTAP Selection (5 CFR §330.707)
An OpDiv/StaffDiv may take the following actions as exceptions to ICTAP selection:

Place a current, or reinstate a former HHS employee with RPL selection priority;
A position change of a current permanent competitive service agency employee;
Appoint a 10-point veteran preference eligible through an appropriate appointing authority;
Reemploy a former HHS employee with regulatory or statutory reemployment rights, including the reemployment of an injured worker who either has been restored to earning capacity by the Office of Workers' Compensation Programs, Department of Labor, or has received a notice that his or her compensation benefits will cease because of recovery from disabling injury or illness;
Appoint an individual for a period limited to 120 or fewer days, including all extensions;
Appoint an individual under an excepted service appointing authority;
Convert an employee serving under an appointment that provides noncompetitive conversion eligibility to a competitive service appointment, including from:
Veterans Recruitment Appointment (VRA) under 5 CFR Part 307;
30% or More Disabled Veteran appointment under 5 CFR Part 316;
Excepted service appointment under 5 CFR Part 213; or
A post-secondary student appointment under 5 U.S.C. 3116 and 5 CFR 316, Subpart I.
Transfer an employee between federal agencies under appropriate authority during an interagency reorganization, interagency transfer of function, or interagency mass transfer;
A Reduction in Force (RIF) action under 5 CFR Part 351;
Intergovernmental Personnel Act (IPA) under 5 U.S.C. Chapter 33, Subchapter VI, or the Information Technology Exchange Program under 5 U.S.C. Chapter 37;
A personnel action pursuant to the settlement of a formal complaint, grievance, appeal, or other litigation;
Extend a time-limited appointment up to the maximum period allowed (including any OPM-approved extension past the regulatory limit on the time-limited appointment) if the original action was made subject to ICTAP selection priority and the original vacancy announcement stated that the appointment could be extended without further announcement;
Reappoint a former HHS employee into a hard-to-fill position requiring unique skills and experience to conduct a formal skills-based agency training program;
Retain an individual whose position is brought into the competitive service under a term appointment (5 CFR Part 316) and convert that individual to career or career-conditional appointment, when applicable via 5 CFR Part 315;
Retain an employee covered by an OPM-approved variation (5 CFR 5.1);
Reemploy a former HHS employee who retired under a formal trial retirement and reemployment program and who requests reemployment under the program's provisions and applicable time limits;
Appoint an appointee of the Senior Executive Service into the competitive service under 5 U.S.C. 3594;
Detail an employee to another federal agency;
Transfer employees under an OPM-approved interagency job swap plan designed to facilitate the exchange of employees between agencies to avoid or minimize involuntary separations;
Transfer or reinstate a ‘Well Qualified’ ICTAP eligible, as defined in this Instruction;
Transfer an employee voluntarily from one federal agency to another under a Memorandum of Understanding or similar agreement under appropriate authority resulting from an interagency reorganization, interagency transfer of function, or interagency realignment, when both the agencies and the affected employee agree to the transfer;
Transfer or a position change of an employee under a supervisory, management, or executive development program (5 CFR Part 412);
Make an appointment using the college graduate hiring authority under 5 U.S.C. 3115 and 5 CFR Part 315.614; or
Make an appointment using the post-secondary student hiring authority under 5 U.S.C. 3116 and 5 CFR 316, Subpart I.
Appendix C: Exceptions to RPL Selection (5 CFR §330.211)
An OpDiv/StaffDiv may take the following actions as exceptions to RPL selection:

Fill a vacancy with an employee of HHS’ current permanent competitive service workforce through detail or position change, subject to the requirements of CTAP;
Appoint a 10-point preference eligible through an appropriate appointing authority;
Appoint a current or former employee exercising restoration rights under 5 CFR Part 353 based on the return from military service or recovery from a compensable injury or disability within one year;
Appoint a current or former employee exercising other statutory or regulatory reemployment rights;
Fill a specific position when all RPL eligibles decline an offer of the position or fail to respond to a written OpDiv/StaffDiv inquiry about their availability;
Convert an employee serving under an appointment that provides noncompetitive conversion eligibility to a competitive service appointment, including from:
A Veterans Recruitment Appointment under 5 CFR Part 307 of this chapter;
An appointment under 5 CFR Part 316 of a veteran with a compensable service-connected disability of 30 percent or more; and
An excepted service appointment under 5 CFR Part 213;
Reappoint without a break in service to the same position currently held by an employee serving under a temporary appointment of 1 year or less (only to another temporary appointment not to exceed one year or less);
Extend an employee's temporary or term appointment up to the maximum permitted by the appointment authority or as authorized by OPM; or
Appoint an individual under an excepted service appointing authority.
Appendix D: Exceptions to PRL Selection (5 CFR Part 302)
An OpDiv/StaffDiv may take the following actions as exceptions to PRL selection:

Fill a vacancy with an employee of HHS’ current permanent excepted service workforce through detail;
Appoint a 10-point preference eligible through an appropriate appointing authority;
Appoint a current or former employee exercising restoration rights under 5 CFR Part 353 based on the return from military service or recovery from a compensable injury or disability within one year;
Appoint a current or former employee exercising other statutory or regulatory reemployment rights;
Fill a specific position when all PRL eligibles decline an offer of the position or fail to respond to a written OpDiv/StaffDiv inquiry about their availability;
Reappoint a current or former non-temporary employee who is a preference eligible, in accordance with 5 CFR §302.402; or
Extend an employee's temporary appointment up to the maximum permitted by the excepted appointment authority and 5 CFR §213.104 or as authorized by OPM.






















362-1
362-1: Pathways Programs
Material Transmitted:
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 362-1, Pathways Programs, dated 08/19/2021

Material Superseded:
HHS Instruction 362, Presidential Management Fellows Program, 12/29/2005

HHS Instruction 362, Presidential Management Fellows Program, 6/30/2012

HHS Instruction 362-1, Pathways Programs, 01/04/2016

Background:
In accordance with 5 Code of Federal Regulation (CFR) Parts 302 and 362, this policy outlines the requirements of the Pathways Programs, consisting of the Intern, Recent Graduate, and Presidential Management Fellows ( PMF) programs.

The Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between HHS and the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) authorizes HHS to utilize the Pathways Programs.

This policy is effective immediately and must be carried out by HHS Operating and Staff Division HR Centers in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, bargaining agreements, and Department policy.

/s/

Michael V. Culpepper
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources and Chief Human Capital Officer, Acting

362-1-00 Sections
362-1-10 Purpose
362-1-20 Background
362-1-30 Coverage and Exclusions
362-1-40 References
362-1-50 Definitions
362-1-60 Responsibilities
362-1-70 General Program Requirements
362-1-80 Developmental Program Requirements
362-1-90 Internship Program
362-1-100 Recent Graduates Program
362-1-110 Presidential Management Fellows Program
362-1-120 Documentation, Reporting, and Accountability

362-1-10  Purpose
This Instruction establishes policy for HHS Operating Divisions and Staff Divisions (OpDiv/StaffDiv, or Division) on the administration and management of the Pathways Programs, specifically:
Delegates OpDivs/StaffDivs Human Resources Centers (HR Centers) to make Pathways Programs appointments at the General Schedule (GS) 1-13 grade levels (or equivalent, including Federal Wage System), in accordance with HHS' Pathways MOU.
Establishes HHS' procedural guidance on the recruitment, assessment, selection, appointment, and promotion of individuals appointed under the Excepted Service, Schedule D, Pathways Programs.
Describes the developmental Pathways Programs requirements (i.e., orientation, participant agreement, individual development plan, mentorship, and training).
Defines the requirements for non-competitive conversion to the competitive service upon successful completion of the Pathways Program requirements.
Outlines workforce planning and OPM reporting requirements for actual and projected OpDiv/StaffDiv usage of the Pathways Programs.
This policy should be used in conjunction with HHS Instruction 302-1, Employment in the Excepted Service, which covers Pathways Programs positions.
When provisions of this policy differ from changes in applicable law or regulation, the changes in law or regulation apply.
362-1-20  Background
The Pathways Programs were established via Executive Order (E.O.) 13562, Recruiting and Hiring Students and Recent Graduates, dated December 10, 2010. The Programs replaced the former Student Temporary Employment Program (STEP) and the Student Career Experience Program (SCEP) with the Intern and Recent Graduate Programs and enhanced the Presidential Management Fellows (PMF) Program. The E.O. also abolished the Federal Career Intern Program (FCIP).

OPM maintains executive oversight of the Pathways Programs and central management of the PMF Program, in accordance with 5 CFR Part 362.

362-1-30  Coverage and Exclusions
Coverage. This policy applies HHS-wide and covers all Pathways Programs' Intern, Recent Graduate, and PMF appointments under Schedule D, 5 CFR §213.3402(a), (b), and (c).
Exclusions.
Intern and Fellowships under Schedule A, 5 CFR §213.3102(r). These programs are sponsored either by the OpDiv/StaffDiv or in conjunction with a third-party organization. Contact employmentpolicy@hhs.gov for program parameters required by OPM.
Student volunteer service authorized under 5 CFR Part 308.
The provisions of this policy pertaining to conditions of employment of bargaining unit employees (e.g., the filling of a position within the scope of the bargaining unit, promotion and reassignments, and adverse actions) are fully negotiable in accordance with 5 U.S.C. Chapter 71. When the provisions of this policy differ from the requirements contained in applicable collective bargaining agreement(s), the agreement takes precedence for covered bargaining unit employees.
362-1-40  References
Executive Order (E.O.) §13562, Recruiting and Hiring Students and Recent Graduates
5 U.S.C. §2301, Merit System Principles 
5 U.S.C. §3110, Employment of Relatives, Restrictions 
5 U.S.C. §3320, Excepted Service; Government of District of Columbia; Selection 
Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Part 213, Excepted Service
5 CFR Part 302, Employment in the Excepted Service
5 CFR §315.713, Conversion Based on Service in a Pathways Program Under Part 362
5 CFR Part 362, Pathways Programs
OPM Pathways Programs Handbook, - PDF August 2016
OPM Vet Guide, Type of Appointment, Excepted Service Employment
OPM/HHS Pathways Programs Memorandum of Understanding (MOU), renewed biennially
HHS Instruction, 300-3, Details and IPA Assignments (for rotational assignments/details)
HHS Instruction, 302-1, Employment in the Excepted Service
HHS Instruction, 315-1, Probationary and Trial Periods
HHS Instruction 330-2, Priority Placement Programs (CTAP, ICTAP, RPL, PRL)
HHS Instruction, 430-1, Performance Management Appraisal Program (non-SES)
HHS Instruction, 752, Discipline and Adverse Action
362-1-50  Definitions
Advanced Degree/Professional Degree. A professional or graduate degree from an accredited, academic institution (e.g., Master's, Doctor of Philosophy (PhD), Juris Doctorate (JD)). See U.S. Department of Education's Database of Accredited Postsecondary Institutions and Programs.
Break in Program. A period of time when an Intern is working but is unable to go to school; or is neither attending school nor working.
Break in Service. The time when an employee is no longer on the payroll and is separated for more than three (3) calendar days, see OPM Guide to Processing Personnel Actions, Glossary of Terms, - PDF unless otherwise noted in this policy.
Certificate Program. Post-secondary education in a qualifying educational institution, equivalent to at least one (1) academic year of full-time study that is part of an accredited college-level, technical, trade, vocational, or business school curriculum. See U.S. Department of Education's Database of Accredited Postsecondary Institutions and Programs.
Competitive Service. Pathways participants are eligible to be non-competitively converted to a term or permanent position in the competitive service after successful completion of the Program, or terminated (see Section 362-1-70, General Program Requirements, Conversions). The competitive service covers all civilian positions in the Federal government that are not specifically excepted from the civil service laws by or pursuant to statute, by the President or by OPM under Rule VI, and are not in the Senior Executive Service (SES) or Senior Level position (SL).
Excepted Service. All Pathways positions are in the excepted service which covers civilian positions in the executive branch of the Federal government that are specifically excepted from the competitive service rules by law or statute, by the President via Executive Order, or by OPM (i.e., Schedules A, B, C, or D), and are not in the SES.
Intern (5 CFR 362 Subpart B). A current high school, vocational, technical, undergraduate, or graduate student appointed while still in school to an initial appointment exceeding one (1) year in the Pathways Internship Program, to explore a federal career as paid employees while continuing their education.
Intern NTE (5 CFR 362 Subpart B). A current high school, vocational, technical, undergraduate, or graduate student appointed while still in school to a paid temporary appointment NTE one (1) year in the Pathways Internship Program, to complete temporary projects, to perform labor-intensive tasks not requiring subject-matter expertise, or to fill traditional summer jobs.
Participant Agreement (5 CFR §362.106). A required formal written agreement between the HHS supervisor and each Pathways participant that clearly identifies the participant's work duties, work schedule, length of appointment, applicable training requirements, mentorship opportunities, performance evaluation procedures, requirements for successful completion of program, and minimum eligibility requirements for conversion to the competitive service.
Pathways Programs Officer (PPO). An individual within Assistant Secretary for Administration, Office of Human Resources, who has overall responsibilities for administering the Pathways Programs HHS-wide. This individual serves as a liaison between HHS and OPM and may also serve as the HHS PMF Coordinator.
Pathways Program Participant. An individual appointed as an Intern, Recent Graduate, or Presidential Management Fellow under the HHS Pathways Program.
Presidential Management Fellow (PMF) (5 CFR 362, Subpart D). An individual appointed to a two (2) year leadership development program designed to attract individuals who demonstrate academic excellence, possess management and leadership potential, and have a clear interest in and commitment to public service. Individuals must apply to OPM's PMF Program's annual job opportunity announcement within two (2) years of receiving a qualifying advanced degree. Students who expect to complete an advanced degree by August 31 of the academic year in which OPM's competition is held may also apply.
Qualifying Educational Institution (5 CFR §362.102):
A public high school whose curriculum has been approved by a State or local governing body; a private school that provides secondary education as determined under State law; or a homeschool that is allowed to operate in a State; and
Any of the following educational institutions or curricula that have been accredited by an accrediting body recognized by the Secretary of the Department of Education: a technical or vocational school; a two or four-year college or university; a graduate or professional school (e.g., law school, medical school); or a post-secondary homeschool curriculum.
Recent Graduate (5 CFR 362, Subpart C). An individual who has obtained a qualifying Associate's, Bachelor's, Master's, Professional, Doctorate, vocational, or technical degree or certificate from a qualifying educational institution within the previous two (2) years of application (up to six (6) years for qualifying veterans) to obtain entry-level developmental experience designed to lead to a career in the Federal government.
Schedule D. The excepted service appointing authority established by Presidential Executive Order 13562 to appoint individuals to Pathways Programs positions.
Student (5 CFR §362.202). An individual who has been accepted for enrollment; or who is enrolled and seeking a degree (diploma, certificate, etc.) in a qualifying educational institution on a full or half-time basis (as defined by the educational institution in which the student is enrolled), including awardees of the Harry S. Truman Foundation Scholarship Program under Public Law 93- 842. Students do not need to be in actual physical attendance in school (i.e., virtual learning), as long as all other requirements are met. A student who needs to complete less than the equivalent of half an academic, vocational, or technical course-load immediately prior to graduating is still considered a student for purposes of the Internship Program.
362-1-60  Responsibilities
HHS Assistant Secretary for Administration, Office of Human Resources (ASA/OHR):
Develops Department-wide policy and guidance regarding the Pathways Programs consistent with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Designates an HHS Pathways Program Officer (HHS PPO) at the General Schedule (GS) 12 or above within ASA/OHR to administer the HHS Pathways Programs; provide technical guidance on the programs and information on upcoming events/deadlines; and serve as HHS' liaison with OPM. The HHS PPO may also serve as the HHS Presidential Management Fellows coordinator, unless another OHR employee is identified.
Submits reports and data to OPM on HHS Pathways Programs, including workforce planning strategies, annual hiring data, PMF change in status, and any other information requested by OPM (5 CFR §§362.104 and 109).
Re-executes the Department's Pathways MOU agreement with OPM every two (2) years to continue HHS' use of the Pathways Programs hiring authority (5 CFR §362.104(a)).
Ensures HHS adheres to the 5 CFR Part 302 requirements for accepting applications, assessing applicants, rating and ranking qualified candidates, and granting veterans' preference as described in this policy.
Approves an OpDiv/StaffDiv's alternate Pathways Programs hiring procedures prior to use to ensure conformance with federal regulations and HHS policy.
Ensures HHS adheres to any appointment or conversion caps placed on the Pathways Programs by OPM (5 CFR §362.108(a)).
Periodically reviews OpDivs/StaffDivs' procedures, actions, and reports to assure conformance with the HHS Pathways MOU with OPM, applicable HHS policy, OPM guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Human Resources Centers (HR Centers):
Comply with this Instruction, any HHS and OPM policy and guidance, collective bargaining agreements, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Designate an OpDiv/StaffDiv Pathway Programs Coordinator to administer the day-to-day aspects of the programs for their serviced Division.
Ensure the development of OpDiv/StaffDiv Pathways Programs' recruitment and developmental procedures, consistent with this policy.
Ensure hiring procedures are applied uniformly, and positions are filled in accordance with the procedures in this policy.
Ensure Pathways participants' continuous eligibility for the Pathways Programs, in accordance with the requirements specified in this policy.
Evaluate the performance of each Pathways participant within their Division and the participant(s) completion of the program requirements for conversion to the competitive service or termination.
Human Resource Directors (HRDs) have the authority to:
Approve breaks in program for Interns and waive up to one-half (320 hours) of the 640- hour minimum service requirement consistent with the procedures in this policy;
Approve program extension requests for Recent Graduates and PMFs submitted by the participant or the participant's supervisor to their servicing HR Center; and
Certify in writing PMFs' completion of the program NLT 30 calendar days prior to the expiration of the PMF's appointment following the procedures in this policy.
This authority may not be redelegated (HHS' Pathways MOU).
Provide information on PMFs' change in status within seven (7) calendar days, and data on projected and actual Pathways Programs hires to the HHS Pathways Program Officer (PPO) annually.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Pathways Program Coordinators (OpDiv/StaffDiv PPCs):
Administer the HHS Pathways Programs within their serviced Division, consistent with HHS policy, OPM guidance, collective bargaining agreements, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Provide advisory services to their Division's Pathways participants and their supervisors on the Pathways Programs consistent with HHS policy and guidance, and applicable federal laws and regulations.
Ensure their Division's compliance with the rules covering workforce planning and employment, including public notice, eligibility, appointment, assessment, selection, promotion, conversion and termination under the Pathways regulations.
Ensure their Division's compliance with delivering and documenting formal training and development, including Pathways Participant Agreements; performance plans and progress evaluations; Individual Development Plans (IDPs); mentors; and training.
Serve as the liaison with the HHS PPO including:
Providing hiring data to fulfill HHS' annual reporting requirements (5 CFR §362.109);
Notifying the HHS PPO on a PMF change in status within seven (7) calendar days including appointment, movement between agencies, withdrawal/resignation, termination, readmission, and conversion (5 CFR 362, Subpart D);
Notifying the HHS PPO when an Intern no longer meets the definition of a student (5 CFR §362.202); and
Notifying the HHS PPO of any participant who is not converted or terminated within required the timeframes (5 CFR §362.107(f)).
Attend the annual OPM PMF hiring fair as an HHS representative at HHS' exhibit/interview table(s); advise PMF finalists about HHS' job opportunities on the PMF Talent Management System; and provide/bring marketing materials for their respective Division.
Submit the PMF reimbursement fee to the OPM PMF Program Office no later than thirty (30) days of a PMF's acceptance on a tentative job offer within their respective Division.
Ensure the OpDiv/StaffDiv adheres to any appointment or conversion caps placed on the HHS Pathways Programs by OPM via the HHS PPO.
362-1-70  General Program Requirements
This section covers the general requirements of all Pathways Programs, except where otherwise specified:

Workforce Planning. Before filling positions, HR Centers should identify the skill sets needed to perform the work in their Division and conduct workforce planning to ensure adequate resources are committed to provide the training and developmental requirements, and an adequate number of permanent positions will be available to convert participants who successfully complete the program requirements. See also Recruitment and Outreach in the general information section of the OPM Pathways Handbook. - PDF
Program Names. OpDivs/StaffDivs may rename their Pathways Programs in accordance with 5 CFR §362.101(b) and HHS' Pathways MOU.
Personnel Actions. When processing appointment personnel actions, OPM's Guide to Processing Personnel Actions, Chapter 11, Excepted Service Appointments, is used. The specific Schedule D authority that authorizes the appointment (5 CFR §213.3402(a), (b), or (c)) must be cited.
Tenure.
Interns serving under an appointment for an initial period expected to last more than one (1) year; Recent Graduates; and PMFs are in excepted service Tenure Group II.
A temporary Intern serving under an appointment NTE one (1) year, who has not completed one (1) year of service, is in excepted service Tenure Group 0.
A temporary Intern serving under an appointment NTE one (1) year, who has completed one (1) year of current continuous service, is in excepted service Tenure Group III.
Documentation. All documentation (e.g., personnel actions, participant agreement, performance plan, IDP, proof of mentorship, training) must be maintained in the participant's eOPF, in accordance with OPM's Guide to Personnel Recordkeeping (5 CFR §293.304; 5 CFR §250.101). OpDivs/StaffDivs must be able to show proof these program requirements were met within the required timeframes.
Citizenship (5 CFR §362.105(e), Consolidated Appropriations Act, and Executive Order 11935).
The Consolidated Appropriations Act (i.e., the annual federal budget) contains a government-wide ban on compensating individuals who are not U.S. citizens or nationals for any federal position within the U.S., unless the agency has a statutory exemption to the ban. An OpDiv/StaffDiv may appoint a non-citizen to a Pathways position if the participant is lawfully admitted to the United States as a permanent resident or is otherwise authorized to be employed; and the OpDiv/StaffDiv is authorized to pay non-citizens under their annual appropriations. HR Centers must consult their legal counsel to identify and comply with their annual OpDiv/StaffDiv-specific appropriations restrictions and exclusions prior to hiring an individual who is not a U.S. citizen for a Pathways position.
A Pathways participant must be a United States citizen to be eligible for noncompetitive conversion to the competitive service.
Employment of Relatives (5 CFR §362.105(f)).
A participant may work in an office where a relative (as defined in 5 U.S.C. §3110(a)(3)) is also employed, when there is no direct reporting relationship, and the relative is not in a position to influence or control the participant's appointment, employment, promotion or advancement. If circumstances arise that result in a direct supervisory relationship between relatives, one of the relatives must be reassigned to another position.
Managers, supervisors, and others in positions to influence personnel actions cannot appoint, employ, promote, or advance a relative to any position within HHS or advocate any such action.
Classification (OPM Pathways Handbook).
Pathways participants whose positions fall under the General Schedule (GS) or a comparable pay system must be classified in the xx99 series of the occupational group of the position being filled.
Pathways participants whose positions fall under the Federal Wage System (FWS) must be classified in the xx01 series of the occupational group of the position being filled.
Recruitment.
Job Opportunity Announcement (JOA).
Interns and Recent Graduates. HR Centers must post a JOA or advertisement in USAJOBS when accepting applications outside their Division for the Intern or Recent Graduate Programs (5 CFR §§362.105(b); 362.203(a); 362.303(a) and HHS' Pathways MOU), and at least minimum public notice (i.e., within the employing OpDiv/StaffDiv) when accepting applications inside their Division.
PMFs. HR Centers must post PMF positions in OPM's Talent Management System (TMS), in accordance with Section 362-1-110 of this policy.
Accepting Applications (HHS' Pathways MOU). All HHS Pathways Programs candidates must apply to an open Pathways Programs JOA in order to receive consideration. Notice of recruitment events must include instructions on how to apply through USAJOBS or the OpDiv/StaffDiv website. Unsolicited applications, or applicants who express an interest for a specific vacancy, are provided instructions on how to apply to the JOA through USAJOBS, TMS, or the OpDiv/StaffDiv website. All Division websites that provide information on vacancies or recruitment events will include a link to the JOA on USAJOBS.
JOA Open Period.
OpDivs/StaffDivs have the discretion to determine the length of time a JOA is open; however, justifications for announcements open less than five (5) calendar days must be included in the recruitment case file. Justifications are based on the number, type(s), grade levels, and geographic locations of the positions being filled; labor market conditions; and recent experience filling similar positions.
OpDivs/StaffDivs may use the following options to manage application volume for positions that attract a high number of applicants:
Limiting the Number of Days a JOA is Open. Divisions should give consideration to the types, grade levels, and geographic locations of the positions being filled; and ensure the time allowed provides for fair and open competition that ensures potential applicants have reasonable opportunity to apply consistent with the merit system principles.
Limiting the Number of Applications Received. OpDivs/StaffDivs have the discretion to set "cut-offs" or limits (e.g., the first 100 applications received) on the number of applications that they will consider when filling a position. When using such limits, HR Centers accept any application received up until 11:59 PM Eastern Time on the day the limit is reached in order to accommodate applicants in non-Eastern time zones.
Using specific eligibility requirements for the Internship Program. OpDivs/StaffDivs may use requirements such as the ability to work a specified number of hours per week or be in good academic standing (i.e., maintenance of a minimum grade point average) as eligibility criteria. In addition, Intern applicants may be required to confirm their ability to work in the specific location(s) listed in the JOA. OpDivs/StaffDivs may not require the completion of educational requirements for specific coursework for occupations that do not have a positive education requirement.
When one or more of these options are used, they must be stated in the JOA, advertisement, or notice and a justification included in the case file.
If extended open periods are used (over 30 days), HR Centers must specify specific cut-off dates during the open period or specify limits on the numbers of applications during the open period.
JOA Information. The information listed in the OPM Pathways Handbook must be included in each Pathways Programs JOA, including:
All HHS Pathways JOAs must include the promotion potential (Full Performance Level or FPL) while in program and upon conversion in order to promote the participant without further competition while in program and upon conversion. Recommended FPL Language: 'Employees selected for this position are eligible for promotion up to the GS-xx grade level while in the Pathways Program and up to the GS-xx grade level after successful completion of the Program.'
JOAs can mention desired academic disciplines, but JOAs cannot require specific academic disciplines for positions that do not have a positive education requirement.
HR Centers may require the ability to work a specified number of hours per week as eligibility criteria or be in good academic standing when filling positions as long as such criteria is included in JOAs and participant agreements; applied uniformly; and stated in the OpDiv/StaffDiv's internal hiring procedures (HHS' Pathways MOU).
OpDivs/StaffDivs may accept applications from individuals who will meet eligibility requirements by an event listed in the JOA (e.g., JOA closing date, certificate issuance date, the date of appointment, etc.). If the JOA does not specify a date or event for meeting eligibility requirements, candidates are required to meet eligibility requirements by the date the certificate is issued. Such eligibility criteria are applied uniformly and described in the HR Center's internal Pathways hiring procedures (HHS' Pathways MOU).
Priority Placement Programs (PPP).
The HHS Priority Reemployment List (PRL) is required to be cleared when filling Pathways positions (5 CFR §362.105(c)(2)). The PRL is located on HR Exchange and provides selection priority to former HHS excepted service employees who have been furloughed or separated by RIF or compensable injury, or who appealed an adverse action to the Merit Systems Protection Board and was found to have been unjustifiably dismissed from the agency, but is not entitled to immediate restoration under the MSPB's decision, and registers for HHS' PRL. When recruiting, HR Centers must first clear the HHS PRL by considering all qualified candidates on HHS' PRL who are registered for the commuting area and the specific Schedule D authority of the Pathways position to be filled before referring the names of other qualified candidates. HR Centers follow the assessment procedures in this policy, and are required to retain sufficient documentation to demonstrate PRL clearance for each Pathways vacancy.
The Career Transition Assistance Program (CTAP), Interagency Career Transition Assistance Program (ICTAP), and Reemployment Priority List (RPL) do not apply when filling Pathways positions or to conversions of Pathways employees to the competitive service (5 CFR §330.609(i); 5 CFR §330.707(g); and 5 CFR §362.107(d)).
Assessment and Selection (5 CFR Parts 211, 302, and 5 CFR §362.105(c)(2)). For additional information, see HHS Instruction, 302-1, Employment in the Excepted Service.
Assessment. OpDivs/StaffDivs assess all candidates for Pathways Programs positions using an unranked assessment method, as described in c.-f. below. OpDivs/StaffDivs may use an alternate method for filling Pathways positions within their Division (i.e., numerical ratings or category rating-like procedures) after they submit their Pathways hiring procedures to OHR for approval to ensure conformity with the requirements in 5 CFR Part 302 and HHS Instruction 302-1, Employment in the Excepted Service. All assessment procedures are applied uniformly and provided to applicants, along with notice of rating, upon an applicant's request (5 CFR 302.302).
ACWA Testing (Federal Register Vol. 77, No. 92, May 11, 2012). Administrative Careers with America (ACWA) testing is not required when filling GS-5 or 7 grade level Pathways positions. OpDivs/StaffDivs have the option to use the OPM ACWA assessment or utilize the unranked assessment method described in this policy when assessing applicants for GS- 5/7 positions formerly covered under ACWA.
Veterans' preference is granted as follows (5 CFR §302.201 ):
'CP' for preference eligibles that have a compensable, service-connected disability of 10% or more;
'XP' for all other preference eligibles eligible for 10-point veteran preference; and
'TP' for all preference eligibles eligible for 5-point veteran preference.
Certificates and Order of Consideration. Qualified candidates are placed on a certificate in the following order (5 CFR §211.102(d)(3); 5 CFR §302.303(d);  5 CFR §302.304 ):
Priority reemployment candidates. Qualified candidates on HHS's PRL must be given selection priority before other candidates can be referred, in accordance with 5 CFR §302.304 (a).
Qualified PRL candidates are placed on a priority reemployment certificate in the same order as other candidates described in d. ii. below.
The selection and pass over/objection procedures described below are followed.
HR Centers may appoint a candidate who is not a PRL eligible, or a PRL eligible who has a lower standing on the PRL list, when the PRL eligible(s) qualifications will create an undue interruption to the position. The HR Center must notify each PRL eligible of the reasons for non-selection and must also notify any preference eligible(s) on the PRL list of their right to appeal to the MSPB (5 CFR §302.304(a)). This documentation must be maintained in the recruitment case file.
Once an HR Center fulfills these requirements, other candidates may be considered for the position.
Other candidates are then placed on a regular certificate in the following order:
Qualified preference eligibles who have a compensable, service-connected disability of 10% or more, unless the list will be used to fill professional positions at GS-9 or above;
All other qualified candidates eligible for 10-point veteran preference;
All qualified candidates eligible for 5-point veteran preference;
All qualified candidates eligible for sole survivorship; then
Qualified candidates not eligible for veteran preference.
For Professional and Scientific Positions at the GS-9 grade level and above: All preference eligibles are considered together regardless of the type of preference, followed by other candidates.
Selection. Selections for all candidates are made from the highest preference category, as long as at least three candidates are in that group. When fewer than three (3) candidates are in the highest preference category, consideration may be expanded to include the next highest preference category (5 CFR §302.401(a) ). The Indian Health Service must give selection priority in accordance with 25 U.S.C. §5117, prior to applying the veterans' preference provisions in 5 CFR Part 302.
Pass Overs and Objections of Preference Eligibles (5 CFR §302.401(b) and OPM Delegated Examining Operations Handbook).
OpDiv/StaffDiv HRDs may approve or deny pass over requests of less than 30% compensable disabled veterans for excepted service positions and document reason(s) for selecting a non-preference eligible. This approval may not be redelegated below the OpDiv/StaffDiv HRD level.
The following pass over and objection requests require OPM approval before making selection(s):
A pass over of any preference eligible with a 30% or more compensable service connected disability (5 U.S.C §3318); 
A pass over of a preference eligible based on medical qualifications (5 CFR Part 339 ); and
Objections based on suitability determinations involving material, intentional false statement, deception or fraud in examination or appointment, or refusal to furnish testimony as required by 5 CFR §731.10 3(a).
Pass over requests requiring OPM approval must be sent to the ASA/OHR at employmentpolicy@hhs.gov for review and concurrence. OHR will send the request to OPM if it concurs with the request. HR Centers must submit the following documentation to ASA/OHR:
Completed SF-62, Agency Request to Passover a Preference Eligible or Object to an Eligible, www.opm.gov/Forms/pdf_fill/SF62.pdf; - PDF
Resume/Application package to include title, series, and grade;
Copy of Position Description;
Copy of Vacancy Announcement;
Certificate of Eligibles; and
A memorandum approved by the HRD with a description of the reason sufficient to sustain an objection/pass over.
No correspondence is sent to a 30% or more compensable disabled applicant until ASA/OHR concurrence is received. Only after OPM has approved the pass over of the preference eligible may the 30% or more compensable disabled veteran be passed over and another applicant selected.
OpDivs/StaffDivs should be mindful of 5 U.S.C. §3320  and 5 CFR §332.406  when considering reasons for passing over a preference eligible, and consult with their legal counsel, if necessary, on whether the justification is likely to meet the standard of making selections in the same manner and under the same conditions required for the competitive service, as specified by 5 U.S.C. §3320. 
Compensation.
Setting Pay on Initial Appointment. OpDivs/StaffDivs adhere to 5 CFR §362.105(j); 5 CFR Parts 531 and 532; and applicable HHS pay policy when setting pay and using pay flexibilities for Pathways participants. See Overview under each Program of this Instruction for authorized grade levels.
Within-Grade Increases (5 CFR 531, Subpart D, and 5 CFR 532.417).
Participants who are either on a temporary appointment or on an appointment limited to one (1) year or less are not eligible for Within-Grade Increases (WGIs).
All other participants are entitled to WGIs and are advanced to the next higher rate of their grade at the beginning of the first applicable pay period following completion of the required waiting period, if their performance is satisfactory and they have not received an equivalent increase in pay during their waiting period.
Promotion. Consistent with HHS Instruction, 302-1, Employment in the Excepted Service, the following requirements must be met for promotions:
The Intern meets the qualification requirements outlined in the OPM's Group Coverage Qualification Standard for Schedule D, Pathways Internship Positions for the next higher grade level and series of the position; or
The Recent Graduate or PMF meets the qualification requirements outlined in the OPM Qualification Standards for the next higher grade level and series for the position;
The participant's current performance rating of record while in the Program demonstrates satisfactory performance of at least 'Achieved Expected Results' or its equivalent, in accordance with HHS' Performance Management Appraisal Program. Participants are eligible for promotion after the minimum assessment or rating period specified in HHS Instruction 430-1, Performance Management Appraisal Program; and
The proposed grade/full performance level is established in the position description and was included in the JOA (see General Program Requirements, Recruitment, JOA Information in this policy).
Interns NTE are not eligible for promotion.
PMF promotions are permitted up to the GS-13 grade level while in the PMF program if the GS-13 full performance level (FPL) is established in the position description and was included in the OpDiv/StaffDiv PMF JOA in TMS. Promotions above the GS-13 grade level can only occur upon or after the date of conversion to a position in the competitive service following successful completion of the Program (HHS' Pathways MOU).
All Pathways Promotions: Time-in-grade restrictions outlined in 5 CFR 300, Subpart F, apply to movement to or within the competitive service; therefore, promotions within the excepted service are not subject to time-in-grade; however, promotions upon (or after) non-competitive conversion to the competitive service are subject to time-in-grade restrictions.
Federal Student Loan Repayment Assistance. OpDivs/StaffDivs may offer student loan repayment assistance as an incentive to recruit/retain highly skilled individuals, and to fill mission- critical and hard-to-fill positions. In offering this incentive, factors such as the value of the incentive to the OpDiv/StaffDiv and pay parity should be considered.
Benefits. Individuals hired for a period expected to last longer than one (1) year are eligible for health and life insurance coverage, so long as they are also expected to be in a pay status for at least one-third of the total period of time from the date of their initial appointment to the date of completion in their respective Program. Participants on a temporary appointment, a seasonal schedule of less than six (6) months per year, or an intermittent schedule who are expected to work 130 hours per month or more for at least 90 days, are eligible for health insurance coverage. For additional guidance, see the OPM Pathways Handbook and/or consult servicing HR Center benefits specialists.
Performance. See Developmental Program Requirements and Separations/Terminations under each Program in this Instruction.
Awards. Pathways Program participants are eligible to receive awards, including performance awards, on-the-spot, special act, and time-off awards consistent with HHS Instruction, 430-1, Performance Management Appraisal Program.
Trial Periods. Trial periods provide an opportunity for supervisors to evaluate employee performance before finalizing appointments (i.e., conversion to the competitive service) or termination. Supervisors set expectations for Pathways participants performance, provide feedback, and evaluate an employee's performance and conduct to determine whether a participant's continued employment is in the best interest of the Department.
In accordance with 5 CFR Part 362 and OPM Pathways Handbook:
Intern. The length of a trial period for an HHS Intern is two (2) years, in accordance with HHS Instruction 315-1, Probationary and Trial Periods. Note: The Intern may gain employee status for the purposes of appeal rights during the Internship appointment.
Recent Graduates. The duration of a Recent Graduate participants' appointment in the excepted service is a trial period (5 CFR §362.303(f)).
PMFs. The duration of a PMF participants' appointment in the excepted service is a trial period (5 CFR §362.404(d)).
All Pathways participants serve an initial one (1) year probationary period upon conversion to the competitive service (5 CFR §§315.713 and 801(e)). Some prior service may be creditable.
HHS Instruction 315-1, Probationary and Trial Periods, should be consulted for additional information on probationary and trial periods including creditable time; calculating service; actions taken for failure to complete a trial or probationary period; and grievances and appeal rights.
See also Separations/Terminations under each Program in this policy.
Reassignments (OPM Pathways Programs Handbook and HHS Instruction 302-1, Employment in the Excepted Service). When reassigning participants to another Pathways position within the same Pathways Program, participants must meet the qualification requirements for the position (series and grade). Reassignments between programs are not permitted. If the participant is an Intern NTE, OpDivs/StaffDivs must provide minimum public notification (internal to the OpDiv/StaffDiv, not on USAJOBS) so that similarly situated Pathways participants within the OpDiv/StaffDiv who are also interested in the position can apply. If more than one individual applies to the position, then the assessment and selection procedures outlined in this policy apply. (See definition for reassignment in OPM's Guide to Processing Personnel Actions, Chapter 14.)
Program Extensions for Recent Graduates and PMFs (5 CFR §§362.303(c), 404(b), and HHS' Pathways MOU). Extensions may be approved by the OpDiv/StaffDiv HRD for up to 120 days for rare or unusual circumstances or situations (e.g., extended leave due to illness, significant life- altering event, military obligations, etc.) that prevent the participant from completing the program. Requests for extensions may be submitted by the Recent Graduate or PMF or the participant's supervisor to their servicing HR Center, and subsequently reviewed and recommended by the HRD. This authority may not be redelegated.
Conversions (5 CFR §362.107).
Subject to any caps imposed by OPM on HHS conversions, OpDivs/StaffDivs may non- competitively convert any Pathways participant who has met program requirements to a term or permanent position in the competitive service provided that this option was clearly stated in the Pathways JOA. A Pathways participant who is non-competitively converted to a term appointment in the competitive service may be subsequently converted to a permanent position in the competitive service at any time before the term appointment expires.
Time spent as a Pathways participant counts towards career tenure when the participant is noncompetitively converted without a break in service of one day to a permanent position in the competitive service upon completion of the program, with or without an intervening term appointment.
HHS Priority Placement Programs (CTAP, ICTAP, RPL or PRL) do not apply to conversions of Pathways participants to the competitive service.
See Conversions under each Program in this policy for specific program requirements.
362-1-80  Developmental Program Requirements
This section covers the development requirements of all Pathways Programs, except where otherwise specified:

Pathways Programs Orientation. OpDiv/StaffDivs provide Pathways participants with a new employee orientation session within 30 days of their appointment to advise participants of program requirements including benefits associated with their appointments, completion of required forms, performance expectations and evaluation, assignment of mentors, and training. All participants should be provided the name of the OpDiv/StaffDiv PPC for program questions. Time spent in orientation may count toward the annual required hours of formal interactive training.
Participant Agreement. All Pathways Program participants must sign an OpDiv/StaffDiv participant agreement prior to their entrance on duty date that, at a minimum, includes:
General description of duties;
Work schedule;
Length of appointment;
Training requirements;
Mentorship opportunities;
Evaluation of employee performance procedures;
Requirements for continuation of employment and successful program completion;
Minimum eligibility requirements for noncompetitive conversion to a term or permanent competitive service position (5 CFR §§362.106 and 107); and
For Interns, specify the end date of the appointment (5 CFR §362.203(d)(3)(i)).
Performance Plan. Performance plans are required for each participant whose appointment are expected to last 90 days or more and must be established within 30 calendar days of the participant's entrance on duty, in accordance with HHS Instruction 430-1, Performance Management Appraisal Program (PMAP). OpDivs/StaffDivs provide regular feedback, hold a mid- year performance review, and complete annual evaluations for participants consistent with HHS' PMAP.
Individual Development Plan (IDP). All participants whose appointments are expected to last more than 90 days must be placed on an IDP within 45 calendar days of the participant's entrance on duty. For PMFs: HR Centers must use the OPM PMF IDP template (OPM Form 1302 - PDF). IDPs are individually tailored to the following elements:
Target Position. A brief description of the target position; and the specific competencies or knowledge, skills, and abilities that will be required to qualify for the target position.
Learning Objective. Specific learning objectives, including the required developmental activities, as well as formal interactive training.
Details and Timelines. Describe when and how the learning objectives will be accomplished.
Demonstrated Success. Describe method used to track objectives and accomplishments.
Mentor. All participants whose appointments are expected to last more than 90 days must be assigned a mentor within 90 calendar days of their entrance on duty date. A PMF mentor must be a current managerial employee outside the PMF's chain of command, but within the HHS.
Training. This list is not all inclusive, additional training classes may be required/assigned.
Interns. There is no minimum number of training hours required for Interns; however, up to 40 hours of formal, interactive annual training must be accessible. The training may use a variety of flexible, cost-effective mediums, such as on-the-job, virtual, classroom, etc. (Intern NTEs hired to complete temporary projects are not required to be provided formal training.)
Recent Graduates. Recent Graduates must receive a minimum of 40 hours of formal, interactive training per year that advances the goals and competencies outlined in each participant's IDP.
Presidential Management Fellows. PMFs must receive a minimum of 80 hours of formal interactive training per year that addresses the competencies outlined in the PMF's IDP, and at least one (1) developmental assignment of four (4) to six (6) months in duration within the PMF's targeted occupation or discipline will be provided.
HHS Mandatory Training. Participants must complete all HHS mandatory training. Such training does not count toward the minimum hours of required training specified above.
Rotational Assignments. Participants (with the exception of Intern NTE per OPM Pathways Programs Handbook) may be assigned to rotational assignments (i.e., a detail) one (1) to six (6) months in duration within their employing OpDiv/StaffDiv, or anywhere within HHS. Rotations do not necessarily need to be in same occupation in which the participant will likely convert; however, must be for the purposes of providing the participant with valuable knowledge, skills, and experiences; to broaden their perspective of the OpDiv/StaffDiv and/or HHS mission; and to aid in their retention. A rotation may be used to give the participant knowledge, skills, or abilities in another area of the functional discipline of the participant's occupation, or in another OpDiv/StaffDiv with similar occupations, for example. See HHS Instruction 300-3, Details and IPA Assignments, for general requirements and required intra-agency financial agreements for reimbursable details.
Documentation. See General Program Requirements in this Instruction.
362-1-90  Internship Program
Overview. The Internship Program provides high school, vocational, technical, undergraduate, and graduate students, who are enrolled in or accepted for enrollment in a qualifying education institution, with paid opportunities to work either part- or full-time in agencies and explore career paths related to their academic fields of study or career interests. Interns must meet the definition of student throughout the duration of their appointment (5 CFR §362.203(b)) and can be appointed at any grade level for which they qualify. Interns who successfully complete the program requirements may be eligible for non-competitive conversion to a term or permanent position in the competitive service.
Eligibility Requirements (5 CFR §362.203(b)). HHS Interns must:
Be accepted or enrolled in a qualifying educational institution pursuing a degree, diploma, or certificate in a qualifying education institution;
Meet the definition of a student throughout the duration of their Intern appointment (except during an approved break in program);
Meet the qualification requirements (series and grade); satisfy suitability and security requirements; and if applicable, satisfy any physical/medical requirements; and
Meet additional requirements specified in the OpDiv/StaffDiv participant agreement with the Intern. See also Developmental Program Requirements, Participant Agreement.
Official Documentation. OpDiv/StaffDivs must request the appropriate documentation (e.g., official transcripts) to verify Interns are in school at least half-time and in good academic standing prior to appointment and periodically throughout the Intern appointment. Official documentation must be provided by the Intern every semester/quarter of an academic school year in order to ensure continued compliance with the eligibility requirements. OpDiv/StaffDiv PPCs must notify the HHS PPO at pathways@hhs.gov when an Intern no longer meets the definition of a student.
Qualification Requirements (5 CFR §362.203). Candidates for Intern positions are evaluated against OPM's Group Coverage Qualification Standard for Schedule D, Pathways Internship Positions, for the series and grade level of the position being filled. OpDiv/StaffDiv have the option of developing qualifications standards instead of using OPM's group standard in accordance with requirements outlined in HHS Instruction 302-1, Employment in the Excepted Service.
Recruitment. See General Program Requirements, Recruitment in this policy.
Appointment. Intern appointments are made under appointment authority 5 CFR §213.3402(a) for the following timeframes (5 CFR §362.203(d)(3)):
Intern (Indefinite) appointments expected to last more than one (1) year. Interns are assigned meaningful work that supports both the OpDiv/StaffDiv's needs and the Intern's academic field of study or career goals. Interns on indefinite appointments should not be assigned simple administrative or clerical tasks as their primary duties.
Intern NTE (Temporary) appointments not to exceed one (1) year. Assignments are short-term projects; labor-intensive duties not requiring subject matter expertise; or summer jobs. Temporary Intern appointments may be extended in accordance with the provisions outlined in 5 CFR §213.104, as long as the Intern continues to meet the eligibility requirements described in this Section and receives a positive recommendation and/or performance evaluation to justify the extension from her/his supervisor.
Work Schedule (5 CFR §362.203(g) and OPM Pathways Handbook). An Intern can work on either a full or part-time basis. Interns cannot work on an intermittent basis. Supervisors are responsible for establishing work schedules with Interns in accordance with 5 CFR §610.121. There are no limitation on the number of hours an Intern can work per week (so long as applicable laws and regulations governing overtime and hours of work are adhered to); however, supervisors and Interns should agree on a work schedule that does not interfere with the Intern's academic schedule or performance, and allows for completion of both their academic and program requirements in a reasonable timeframe. The work schedule must be documented in the Participant Agreement.
Breaks in Program. See also Definitions in this policy. A break in program must meet the following criteria:
Breaks are permissible in certain circumstances (e.g., medical leave, financial hardship, military service, or other situations outside of the participant's control);
The Intern must initiate a written request for a break in program and submit request to his/her supervisor;
The HRD, in consultation with the Intern's supervisor, may use their discretion to either approve or deny a request for a break in program, as well as determine the length of the break; however, breaks may not exceed 120 consecutive days in a calendar year;
Interns must be in good academic standing, as defined by the school, generally at least a 2.0 Grade Point Average (GPA) for undergraduate programs (cumulative; no rounding); and a 3.0 GPA for advanced degree programs;
If the waiver is approved, and the Intern will neither be attending school or working, the employee will be placed on leave-without-pay (LWOP) for the duration of the break; and
OpDiv/StaffDiv PPCs must monitor breaks within their Division and request official documentation described in this Section prior to the Intern returning to duty/program.
Compensation. See General Program Requirements in this policy.
Intern Program Requirements. See Developmental Program Requirements in this policy.
Rotational Assignment(s). See under Developmental Program Requirements in this policy.
Program Extensions. See Appointment, Intern NTE in this Section.
Non-Competitive Conversion (5 CFR §362.204). All Interns are eligible for conversion to a term or permanent position in the competitive service if the Intern meets the following requirements:
Is a U.S. Citizen;
Completed at least 640 hours of work experience in the Intern Program while enrolled as a half- or full-time degree- or certificate-seeking student; or meets the requirements for a waiver described below in this section;
Successfully completed a course of academic study at a qualifying educational institution conferring a diploma, certificate, or degree within 120 days preceding the appointment;
The possibility of conversion was included in the JOA used to fill the Intern position;
Receives a favorable recommendation for conversion in writing from their first-level supervisor; and
Meets the OPM qualification requirements (series and grade) of the position which the participant will be converted.
Interns must be converted within 120 days following successful degree completion, or terminated. The 120 days cannot be extended or used to complete the academic or program requirements. OpDiv/StaffDiv PPCs must notify the HHS PPO at pathways@hhs.gov when these timeframes are not met.
Interns who separate from the Federal government before or during the 120-day period after they complete their academic requirements lose their eligibility for non-competitive conversion to a term or permanent position in the competitive service.
Interns may be converted within HHS or any other executive agency.
For additional guidance, see Conversions under General Program Requirements in this policy.
Requirements to Waive Work Hours (5 CFR §362.204(d) and HHS' Pathways MOU). OpDiv/StaffDiv HRDs may waive up to one-half (320 hours) of the 640-hour service requirement for:
An Intern who has completed at least 320 hours of career-related work experience in the Internship Program and demonstrates outstanding academic achievement and exceptional job performance:
Official documentation showing an overall GPA of 3.5 or better on a 4.0 scale; standing in the top 10% of the student's graduating class; and/or induction in a nationally recognized scholastic honor society; and
Official performance summary rating given by the student's Internship supervisor higher than 'Achieved Expected Results' or its equivalent in accordance with HHS' Performance Management Appraisal Program.
Comparable non-federal internship experience in a field or functional area related to the Intern's target position and acquired while the individual:
Worked in, but not for, a Federal agency, pursuant to a formal internship agreement, comparable to the Pathways Internship Program;
Worked in, but not for, a Federal agency, pursuant to a written contract with a third- party provider officially established to provide internship experience that is comparable to the Pathways Internship Program;
Honorable active duty military service, including the National Guard and Reserves, as defined under 5 U.S.C. 2101; or
Student volunteer service described under 5 CFR Part 308 and other Federal programs designed to give internship experience to students, if the experience is comparable to the experience gained in the Pathways Internship Program.
Termination (5 CFR §362.205). As a condition of employment, the appointment expires:
120 days after completion of the Intern's course of academic study at a qualifying educational institution conferring a diploma, certificate, or degree, unless the Intern is converted to a position in the competitive service as described above in this Section; or
Upon the expiration of the Intern NTE (temporary) appointment.
Interns may also be terminated during their Intern appointment for reasons including misconduct, poor performance, suitability, or failure to follow the terms and conditions in the participant agreement including:
The Intern no longer meets the definition of student. The OpDiv/StaffDiv PPC must notify the HHS PPO at pathways@hhs.gov;
The Intern does not provide official documentation of current enrollment; or
The Intern does not maintain good academic standing, as defined by the educational institution.
An OpDiv/StaffDiv's Employee Relations staff must be consulted prior to initiating termination actions for reasons other than expiration of appointment to ensure compliance with applicable federal laws and regulations and HHS policy. Once a participant meets the legal definition of an employee, they have due process rights and are entitled to advance written notice, an opportunity to respond to a proposed adverse action, and appeal rights to the Merit Systems Protection Board. For additional information, see HHS Instruction, 315-1, Probationary and Trial Periods, and HHS Instruction, 752, Discipline and Adverse Action.
362-1-100  Recent Graduates Program
Overview. The HHS Recent Graduates Program is a one (1) year* development program that provides entry-level career opportunities for individuals who have recently graduated from qualifying educational institutions or programs. Recent Graduates may be appointed up to the GS-12 or equivalent grade level, depending on qualifications (see Qualification Requirements in this Section). Those who successfully complete the program requirements may be eligible for non-competitive conversion to a term or permanent position in the competitive service. *CDC's Public Health Association Program for Recent Graduates is a two (2) year development program starting at the GS-5 grade level (HHS' Pathways MOU).
Eligibility Requirements (5 CFR §362.302). The following individuals are eligible to apply:
Individuals who completed a qualifying associate's, bachelors, masters, professional, doctorate, vocational or technical degree, or certificate from a qualifying educational institution within the previous two (2) years; or
Veterans, who due to military service were unable to apply within two (2) years of completing a qualifying associate's, bachelors, masters, professional, doctorate, vocational or technical degree, or certificate from a qualifying educational institution, have a full two (2) years upon release or discharge from active duty to apply. However, a veteran's eligibility period may not extend beyond six (6) years from the date on which the veteran completed the academic requirements described above.
Individuals are eligible to apply to the HHS Recent Graduates Program up to nine (9) months prior to completing their academic requirements.
Qualification Requirements.
Candidates for Recent Graduate positions are evaluated against the OPM Qualification Standard for the position (series and grade) to be filled and are eligible for the following grade levels if the following qualifications are met:
GRADE LEVEL	RECENT GRADUATE QUALIFICATION REQUIREMENTS
Up to GS-9	Any position in which the candidate qualifies.
GS-11	Science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) positions, if the candidate possesses a Ph.D. or equivalent degree directly related to the STEM position being filled; OR

Scientific or professional positions, as defined in OPM's General Schedule Qualification Standards, that are research related, if the candidate possesses a Master's or equivalent graduate degree directly related to the position being filled.
GS-12	Scientific or professional positions, as defined in OPM's General Schedule Qualification Standards, that are research related, if the candidate possesses a Ph.D. or equivalent degree directly related to the position being filled.
Recent Graduates are placed in positions with progressively more responsible duties which provide career advancement (career ladder) opportunities and cannot be appointed at the full performance level of any position.
Recruitment. See Section 362-1-70 I., General Program Requirements, Recruitment.
Appointment. Recent Graduate appointments are made under appointment authority 5 CFR §213.3402(b) for a period of one (1) year (with the exception of CDC's two (2) year program).
Movement Between Agencies (5 CFR §362.304). Recent Graduates may apply to the Pathways Program in other Federal agencies prior to completing HHS' Recent Graduate program requirements. Similarly, Recent Graduates at other Federal agencies may apply to HHS' Recent Graduate positions prior to completion of program requirements at other agencies. Time served under the previous agency's program is credited towards the program requirements of the new agency provided there is no break in service, as defined in this policy.
Compensation. See General Program Requirements in this policy.
Recent Graduate Program Requirements. See Developmental Program Requirements in this policy.
Rotational Assignment(s). See under Developmental Program Requirements in this policy.
Program Extensions. See General Program Requirements in this policy.
Non-Competitive Conversion (5 CFR §362.305). Recent Graduates are eligible for conversion to a term or permanent position in the competitive service if the Recent Graduate meets the following requirements:
Is a U.S. Citizen;
Successfully completes at least one (1) year of continuous service and all program requirements;
Receives a rating of at least 'Achieved Expected Results' or its equivalent in accordance with HHS' Performance Management Appraisal Program;
Receives a favorable recommendation for conversion in writing from t h e ir first-level supervisor; and
Meets the OPM qualification requirements (series and grade) of the position which the participant will be converted.
The non-competitive conversion may be made effective on the date the service requirement is met, or at the end of an approved program extension, if applicable.
HHS Recent Graduates may only be converted within HHS; and HHS may not convert Recent Graduates from other Federal agencies.
For additional guidance, see Conversions under General Program Requirements in this policy.
Termination (5 CFR §362.306). As a condition of employment, the appointment expires:
At the end of the one (1) year appointment (plus any approved extensions), unless the Recent Graduate is converted to a position in the competitive service.
Recent Graduates may also be terminated during their Recent Graduate appointment for reasons including misconduct, poor performance, suitability, or failure to follow the terms and conditions of the participant agreement.
An OpDiv/StaffDiv's Employee Relations staff must be consulted prior to initiating termination actions for reasons other than expiration of appointment to ensure compliance with applicable federal laws and regulations and HHS policy. Once a participant meets the legal definition of an employee, they have due process rights and are entitled to advance written notice, an opportunity to respond to a proposed adverse action, and appeal rights to the Merit Systems Protection Board. For additional information, see HHS Instruction, 315-1, Probationary and Trial Periods, and HHS Instruction, 752, Discipline and Adverse Action.
362-1-110  Presidential Management Fellows Program
Overview. The Presidential Management Fellows (PMF) Program is a professional leadership and development program centrally managed by OPM. The PMF program promotes careers in the Federal government by offering leadership development opportunities to graduates who have received advanced degrees within the past two (2) years, and is designed to attract individuals who demonstrate academic excellence, possess management and leadership potential, and have an interest in and commitment to public service. Individuals are appointed at the GS-9, GS-11, or GS- 12 grade level (or equivalent), and at the end of the two (2) year program, employees who meet all program requirements may be non-competitively converted to a term or permanent position in the competitive service (5 CFR 362 Subpart D).
OPM Recruitment, Assessment, and Selection as a PMF Finalist (5 CFR §362.403).
OPM manages the annual recruitment for the PMF program. Candidates apply to the PMF Program's annual JOA in USAJOBS. Interested applicants may apply if they:
Have received a qualifying advanced degree within two (2) years of the JOA, or
Expect to complete an advanced degree by August 31 of the academic year in which OPM's competition is held.
Candidates may apply more than once under the criteria described in 5 CFR §362.403(d).
OPM assesses PMF finalists for initial appointments at the GS-9 grade level (or equivalent) based on each candidate's experience and accomplishments via a structured assessment process.
Veterans' preference is applied by OPM and PMF finalists' preference status are annotated on the PMF finalist list.
OPM selects the finalists and publishes the PMF finalist list annually on the PMF website at https://www.pmf.gov/.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Recruitment, Assessment, and Selection of a PMF Finalist. After the list of PMF finalists is published by OPM, registered OpDivs/StaffDivs are responsible for recruiting, assessing, and selecting PMF finalists for positions within their respective Division:
OpDiv/StaffDiv PPCs advertise PMF job opportunities for their respective Division in the PMF Talent Management System (TMS) on OPM's website. (Each OpDiv/StaffDiv PPC will need an account established by the HHS PPO. Send requests to pathways@hhs.gov.) JOAs must contain sufficient information for finalists to determine their interest in applying to the position, including job title, duties, location(s), promotion potential, and the possibility of conversion to a term or permanent competitive service position.
Applications are accepted for PMF positions posted in TMS in accordance with Accepting Applications in this policy.
PMF job opportunities are open in accordance with the JOA Open Period in this policy.
OpDivs/StaffDivs use OPM's Qualification Standards for PMF positions that are filled above the GS-9 level or for positions that have Individual Occupational Requirements at the GS-9 level. (PMF finalists are pre-qualified at the GS-9 level, see B. 2. above.)
OpDivs/StaffDivs follow the assessment and selection procedures in this Instruction when filling PMF positions (5 CFR §362.105(c)(2) and the OPM Pathways Handbook).
OpDivs/StaffDivs must exhaust or pass over preference eligibles before considering non- preference eligibles for PMF positions. See pass over and objection procedures in this policy.
Appointment. PMF appointments are for two (2) years under appointment authority 5 CFR §213.3402(c).
Required Documentation. PMFs must provide official documentation to verify her or his graduate degree completion prior to initial appointment/entrance on duty.
Reimbursement Fee. The PMF reimbursement fee ($8,000 per PMF with PMF Class of 2022) must be submitted to OPM's PMF Program Office at pmffee@opm.gov no later than 30 days after the PMF accepts a tentative job offer. An Interagency Agreement Form (FS Form 7600A and B) found under the 'Agencies' section at www.pmf.gov must also be submitted. See www.pmf.gov for instructions on how to complete and submit this form.
Appointment Eligibility. PMFs are eligible for appointment for 12 months from the date OPM selects the individual as a PMF finalist. PMFs must enter on duty within this timeframe.
Entry Level Grade. Appointments may be made at the GS-9, GS-11, or GS-12 grade level (or equivalent), based on the PMF's qualifications.
Full Performance Level (FPL). OpDivs/StaffDivs determine the career ladder of PMF positions within their Division; however, the FPL may not exceed GS-13 grade level and must be established in the position description and included on the OpDiv/StaffDiv JOA posted on TMS, in accordance with the OPM Pathways Handbook and Merit System Principles.
The OpDiv/StaffDiv PPC must notify the HHS P P O at pathways@hhs.gov within seven (7) calendar days after appointment, so the PPO can notify OPM via TMS.
Movement between Agencies (5 CFR §362.406). PMFs may move to another Federal agency at any time during their PMF appointment under the following conditions:
The PMF must separate from the current agency and the new agency must appoint the participant without a break in service; and
Time served under the previous PMF appointment applies towards the completion of the program at the new employing agency.
If the move occurs within the first six (6) months of the PMF's appointment, the original appointing agency may request reimbursement of one-quarter of the PMF placement fee from the new appointing agency.
The OpDiv/StaffDiv PPC must notify the HHS P P O at pathways@hhs.gov within seven (7) calendar days when a PMF from another Federal agency is appointed to HHS, so the PPO can notify OPM via TMS.
Compensation. See General Program Requirements in this policy.
PMF Program Requirements.
Orientation. In addition to the internal orientation described under Developmental Program Requirements in this policy, OPM periodically offers PMF orientations via webinar throughout the year. These sessions last for approximately two (2) hours and address program requirements and individual questions. The hours spent in this training may count toward the required 80 hours of formal interactive training per year.
Developmental Assignment. PMFs are required to participate in one (1) developmental assignment (i.e., detail) four (4) to six (6) months in duration to build competencies in the occupation or functional discipline in which the PMF will most likely convert, with management and/or technical responsibilities consistent with the PMF's position description and IDP.
The assignment may be within HHS or in another Federal agency with an active signed Pathways Programs MOU with OPM. The assignment must be outside the PMF's direct chain of command.
As an alternative, a PMF may participate in a HHS-wide or Administration initiative that will provide the PMF with the experience s/he would have gained through the four (4) to six (6) months developmental assignment.
Rotational Assignment(s). See under Developmental Program Requirements in this policy.
Assignment Requests. Consistent with 5 CFR §362.405(b)(4-5):
Development and rotation assignments (i.e., details) are negotiated in advance with the PMF, his/her supervisor, host supervisor, and the servicing HR Center, and meet the following requirements:
PMFs have signed a participant agreement, and are placed on an IDP and performance plan before the assignment (see Developmental Program Requirements in this policy); and
The assignment has written supervisory approval, i.e., the supervisor certifies the assignment supports, and is directly linked to, the PMF's IDP; and any travel within or Outside the Continental United States (OCONUS) and its Territories supports the overall mission of the Division.
Assignments must be clearly outlined in either an inter or intra agency financial agreement between OpDivs/StaffDivs or HHS and the hosting agency, in accordance with the reimbursable and non-reimbursable agreement requirements outlined in HHS Instruction 300-3, Details and IPA and HHS Financial Management Directive, Chapter 2 Interagency Agreement.
All assignments outside HHS, or that include OCONUS travel, must be submitted to the HHS PPO at pathways@ hhs.gov for review, coordination, and approval at least 30 calendar days prior to the proposed assignment and include a justification for the assignment and proof of 4. a. and b. above.
Performance assessments are required for assignments scheduled to last more than 90 calendar days. Hosting supervisors are responsible for assessing the PMF's performance at the conclusion of the assignment, and the performance assessment will be used by the PMF's HHS supervisor when completing the PMF's annual performance evaluation.
An extension and/or termination of an assignment must be mutually agreed upon by the PMF, his/her HHS supervisor, and the host agency. A 15 calendar day written notice is required.
PMFs immediately return to their employing office upon completion of the assignment.
Program Extensions. See General Program Requirements in this policy.
Certification (5 CFR §362.405 and HHS' Pathways MOU).
HRDs evaluate each PMF within their Division, and determine whether to certify in writing that the PMF met all program requirements, including performance and developmental requirements outlined in the PMF's performance plan and IDP. The HRD may consult the employee's supervisor and/or mentor to make their decision.
HRDs must certify NLT 30 calendar days prior to the expiration of the PMF's appointment and notify the PMF of his/her decision. This authority may not be redelegated.
Certifications must be forwarded annually upon request of the HHS PPO to pathways@hhs.gov.
If an HRD does not certify a PMF, the PMF may request for OPM to reconsider. The request must be in writing within 15 calendar days of the HRD's decision. Approved requests are sent to the HHS PPO at pathways@hhs.gov for review and OPM approval. OPM's decision is not subject to appeal and the PMF may continue in the Program pending outcome of OPM's decision. OpDiv/StaffDivs are required to continue to provide the appropriate developmental activities during the waiting period.
Non-Competitive Conversion (5 CFR §362.409). PMFs are eligible for conversion, without a break in service, to a term or permanent position in the competitive service if the PMF meets the following requirements:
Is a U.S. citizen;
Completed all PMF program requirements within two (2) years of appointment (plus any approved extensions);
Received a rating of at least 'Achieved Expected Results' or its equivalent in accordance with HHS' Performance Management Appraisal Program;
Receives a favorable recommendation for conversion in writing from t h e ir first-level supervisor;
Is certified in writing by the servicing HRD that the PMF has met all requirements prior to conversion (HHS' MOU with OPM); and
Meets the OPM qualification requirements (series and grade) of the position which the participant will be converted.
For additional guidance, see Conversions under General Program Requirements in this policy.
Separations.
Withdrawal/Resignation (5 CFR §362.407). A PMF may withdraw from the program at any time.
Withdrawals are treated as resignations from Federal service; however, any obligations established upon admission and appointment, such as a recruitment incentive, still apply.
If the PMF previously held a permanent appointment in the competitive service in the OpDiv/StaffDiv immediately prior to entering the Program, and the withdrawal from the program is not related to misconduct, poor performance, or suitability, the PMF may be placed in a permanent competitive service position within the employing OpDiv/StaffDiv at the discretion of the servicing HRD (5 CFR §362.407(a)(2)).
The OpDiv/StaffDiv PPC must notify the HHS PPO at pathways@hhs.gov within seven (7) calendar days when a PMF withdraws from the PMF program, so the PPO can notify OPM via TMS.
Readmission (5 CFR §362.407(b)). If a PMF withdraws from the program for reasons that are not related to misconduct, poor performance, or suitability, the former PMF may petition their servicing OpDiv/StaffDiv in writing for readmission and reappointment to the PMF Program. Such a petition must be in writing and include appropriate justification. The HRD, in consultation with the OpDiv/StaffDiv leadership, may tentatively approve or deny the request for readmission. The HHS PPO is notified at pathways@hhs.gov within seven (7) calendar days of readmission approval, along with the PMF's proposed status in the Program upon readmission and reappointment. ASA/OHR will notify the OPM Director. OPM may overrule HHS' decision to readmit and reappoint the PMF, and the OPM Director's decision is not subject to appeal.
Termination (5 CFR §362.408 and OPM Pathways Handbook). As a condition of employment, the appointment expires:
At the end of the two (2) year appointment (plus any approved extensions) unless the PMF participant is selected for non-competitive conversion.
A PMF may also be terminated for reasons including misconduct, poor performance, suitability, or failure to follow the terms and conditions of the PMF's participant agreement.
An OpDiv/StaffDiv's Employee Relations staff must be consulted prior to initiating termination actions for reasons other than expiration of appointment to ensure compliance with applicable federal laws and regulations and HHS policy. Once a participant meets the legal definition of an employee, they have due process rights and are entitled to advance written notice, an opportunity to respond to a proposed adverse action, and appeal rights to the Merit Systems Protection Board. For additional information, see HHS Instruction, 315- 1, Probationary and Trial Periods, and HHS Instruction, 752, Discipline and Adverse Action.
The OpDiv/StaffDiv PPC must notify the HHS PPO at pathways@hhs.gov within seven (7) calendar days when a PMF is terminated from the PMF program, so the PPO can notify OPM via TMS.
362-1-120  Documentation, Reporting, and Accountability
Records associated with hiring actions must be retained in individual recruitment case files to allow for third-party reconstruction. Records associated with personnel actions, including all documentation sufficient for third party reconstruction purposes, must be retained according to the record disposition schedule. Generally, all records created in a given year must be retained for a total of three (3) full years. Records involved in litigation and grievance processes may be destroyed only after official notification is received from OPM, Department of Justice, courts, the Office of the General Counsel, etc. that the matter has been fully litigated, or resolved, and closed.
HHS is required to report to OPM annually on projected and actual Pathways Programs hires, in accordance with 5 CFR §362.109. OpDiv/StaffDiv PPCs will provide data for their serviced Division upon request by the HHS PPO.
ASA/OHR will conduct periodic accountability reviews to analyze compliance with this policy, HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.

























1104-1
HHS Instruction 1104-1: Delegated Examining Operations
Material Transmitted:
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 1104-1, Delegated Examining Operations, dated 08/03/2020

Material Superseded:
HHS Instruction 300-1, HHS Administrative Careers With America (ACWA), dated October 26, 2015

HHS Instruction 337-1, Category Rating and Selection Procedures, dated November 3, 2010

Background:
The Office of Personnel Management (OPM) delegated to HHS, via Interagency Delegated Examining Agreement, HHS-1, the authority to examine applicants for competitive service positions for all occupational series and grade levels nationwide. This Instruction is established to provide HHS-wide policy on conducting Delegated Examining (DE) Operations under Title 5, United States Code (U.S.C.) Part 1104, in accordance with the operational procedures and agency responsibilities prescribed in the OPM Delegated Examining Operations Handbook (DEOH).

This issuance is effective immediately and must be carried out in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, bargaining agreements, and Departmental policy.

/s/

J. Blair Duncan
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources
Chief Human Capital Officer

Subject: Delegated Examining Operations
1104-1-00 Purpose
1104-1-10 References
1104-1-20 Coverage
1104-1-30 Definitions
1104-1-40 Responsibilities
1104-1-50 Policy
1104-1-60 Documentation and Accountability

1104-1-00 Purpose
This Instruction establishes Delegated Examining (DE) policy and procedural guidance for the Department of Health and Human Services (Department or HHS) Human Resources Offices and designated staff assigned to conduct DE operations, as authorized by the Interagency Delegated Examining Agreement, HHS-1, between the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) and HHS.

This policy should be used in conjunction with the OPM's Delegated Examining Operations Handbook (DEOH) and the references listed in this Instruction.

When provisions of this policy differ from changes in applicable law or regulation, the changes in law or regulation apply.

1104-1-10 References
5 U.S.C. §1104, Delegation of Authority for Personnel Management 
5 U.S.C. §2108, Veteran; disabled veteran; preference eligible 
5 U.S.C. §3305, Competitive service; examinations; when held 
5 U.S.C §§3309 through 3318, Examination, Certification, and Appointment 
5 U.S.C. §3319, Alternative ranking and selection procedures 
5 U.S.C. §3327, Civil Service Employment Information 
5 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 211, Veteran Preference
5 CFR Part 300, Employment (General)
5 CFR Part 330, Recruitment, Selection and Placement 
5 CFR Part 332, Recruitment and Selection Through Competitive Examination
5 CFR Part 337, Subpart C, Examining System 
29 CFR Part 1607, Uniform Guidelines on Employee Selection Procedures 
Interagency Delegated Examining Agreement (HHS-1) between OPM and HHS
OPM Delegated Examining Operations Handbook (DEOH) - PDF
OPM Delegated Examining Certification Program Guide - PDF
OPM Vet Guide
HHS Instruction, 330-2, Priority Placement Programs, 04/08/2020
1104-1-20 Coverage and Exclusions
This Instruction covers delegated examining HHS-wide. It does not apply to merit promotion, the excepted service, or the Senior Executive Service (see 5 U.S.C. §1104).

The following HHS Operating and Staff Divisions (OpDivs and StaffDivs) are authorized to conduct delegated examining activities under the Interagency Delegated Examining Agreement, HHS-1:

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS)
Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA)
Indian Health Service, Navajo Region (IHS)
Indian Health Service, North Plains Region (IHS)
Indian Health Service, Rockville Headquarters (IHS)
Indian Health Service, Southeast Region (IHS)
Indian Health Service, Southwest Region (IHS)
Indian Health Service Western Region Human Resources Center (IHS)
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Office of Inspector General (OIG)
Office of Medicare Hearings and Appeals (OMHA)
Staffing Recruitment Operations Center (SROC)

1104-1-30 Definitions
ACWA, or Administrative Careers With America. ACWA was the result of a 1979 class action law suit concerning an exam OPM then used to evaluate candidates for certain positions at the GS-5 and GS-7 grade levels across government. As a result, OPM was required to develop assessment tools for the positions covered. As of 2007, federal agencies are no longer required to use the ACWA assessment tools and may use any other validated (i.e., job-related) assessment tool(s) when filling competitive service positions. Such assessment tools must comply with the requirements specified in this Instruction (see Section 1104-1-50, Policy, Job Analysis and Assessments).
Category Rating. Category rating is a method of evaluating candidates who meet eligibility and minimum qualification requirements for the position by assessing the applicants' experience, education, and training and placing them into pre-defined "quality categories" rather than assigning individual numerical scores. Category rating is synonymous with alternative rating described in 5 U.S.C. §3319.
Delegated Examining. OPM may delegate authority to an executive agency to conduct delegated examining, i.e., examine applicants for competitive service positions that are open to all U.S. citizens including current federal employees. Delegated examining is synonymous with competitive examining. (5 U.S.C. §1104)
Direct Hire Authority. A Direct Hire Authority (DHA) permits an agency who has delegated examining authority to hire, after public notice, any qualified applicant to fill competitive service positions at GS-15 and below without having to rate applicants or apply veterans' preference (5 CFR 337, Subpart B).
Pass overs and Objections. For full definitions, see DEOH, Chapter 6, Section D.
Pass over. An agency request to "pass over" a preference eligible to select a non-preference eligible.
Objection. An agency request to remove a preference eligible from consideration from a certificate.
Preference Eligible. Individuals who receive preference in appointment over other applicants because of their military service or because they are a family member of a military service member. See 5 U.S.C. §2108(3) for full definition.
Public Notice. A legal requirement to post all job opportunity announcements (JOA) on USAJOBS when accepting applications from outside the federal workforce for competitive service positions lasting more than 120 days (5 U.S.C. §§ 3327 and 3330).
Subject Matter Expert (SME). An individual who is an expert of the job to be filled. A SME is typically an incumbent in the same position or first level supervisor (but cannot be the selecting official or hiring manager to maintain objectivity in the hiring process) and has knowledge of the competencies needed to perform the position and is asked to assist HR in the assessment process, i.e., development of the job analysis, applicant assessment, and/or interviews.
Variation. OPM is authorized by 5 CFR §5.1 to approve a variation (i.e., an exception to regulation) to avoid unnecessary hardship to an employee (i.e., loss of employment, pay, grade, or significant service credit) when an agency makes a regulatory error during the competitive hiring process. OpDiv/StaffDiv Human Resources Offices must first attempt to correct the erroneous appointment by placing the employee on a legal appointment (e.g., by determining if the employee could have been properly appointed at the time when the error was made via a previously advertised position; posting a JOA; or appointing via a noncompetitive appointment authority, etc.). OPM does not have the authority to make exceptions to law, Executive Order, or court decision. For additional guidance, see DEOH, Chapter 6, Section E, and Erroneous Certification and Priority Consideration in this Instruction.
Veteran. Defined under 5 U.S.C. §2108(1-2) and 5 CFR §211.102.
1104-1-40 Responsibilities
HHS Assistant Secretary for Administration (ASA),Office of Human Resources (HHS OHR):
Develops Department-wide policy and guidance regarding delegated examining, including the acceptance of applications; category rating procedures; veterans' preference adjudication; and requests requiring OPM approval, consistent with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Serves as the liaison with OPM on matters pertaining to delegated examining for the Department.
Submits to OPM any pass over and objection request that requires OPM approval.
Submits to OPM any request for variation.
Submits to OPM requests for final determination of the physical ability of a preference eligible to perform the duties of a position.
Submits to OPM requests for a HHS-wide or OpDiv/StaffDiv-specific direct hire authority.
Periodically reviews OpDiv/StaffDiv delegated examining procedures, actions, qualification standards, and reports to assure conformance with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations; and
Takes corrective action, as required by OPM, as the result of the review of delegated examining activities within HHS (5 U.S.C. §1104).
OpDiv/StaffDiv Human Resources Offices (OHROs):
Comply with this Instruction, any HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Maintain programmatic responsibility for the delegated examining process within their organization.
Ensure that all human resources (HR) staff, including contractors, performing delegated examining activities have successfully completed the initial OPM delegated examining training and are currently certified to perform delegated examining.
Ensure that managers, supervisors and personnel involved in the competitive hiring process are trained and informed of merit systems principles and prohibited personnel practices.
Establish internal Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for delegated examining activities, including category rating procedures, consistent with applicable law, regulations, the DEOH, and this Instruction.
Fill vacant positions with the best qualified persons from a sufficient pool of diverse, well-qualified applicants.
Submit to HHS OHR Policy and Accountability Division (PAD) any requests to object/pass over a veteran with a 30% or more compensable service-connected disability for OPM approval.
Submit to PAD OpDiv/StaffDiv Human Resources Director (HRD) objection/pass over approvals of preference eligibles with less than 30% compensable service-connected disability, or an applicant with derived preference, within 14 calendar days of HRD approval, along with the supporting documentation listed in Section 1104-1-50, Pass Overs and Objections of Preference Eligibles of this Instruction.
Audit every certificate of eligibles even when no selections are made and/or the certificate is canceled.
Submit to PAD any variation requests for OPM approval, after attempts to regularize (i.e., correct) the appointment are unsuccessful.
Submit to PAD any requests for OpDiv/StaffDiv-specific direct hire authorities for OPM approval.
Ensure that the restrictions on movement after competitive appointment (5 CFR 330, Subpart E) are followed.
Within five (5) business days of the addition, termination, or suspension of any DE office(s), notify PAD so OHR can notify OPM, as required by HHS-1.
Human Resources Staff Performing Delegated Examining Activities:
Obtain and maintain current certification under the OPM's Delegated Examining Certification Program.
Conduct delegated examining consistent with law, federal regulations, the DEOH, and this Instruction.
Work with hiring officials to develop job analyses and assessment tools prior to posting the JOA. Ensure that each job analysis is signed and dated by the hiring official and HR Specialist.
Ensure that qualification determinations for each applicant are in accordance with the appropriate OPM qualification standard.
Appropriately apply and adjudicate veterans' preference.
1104-1-50 Policy
OPM DE Certification. All individuals responsible for conducting DE activities (i.e. an employee or contractor who performs delegated examining activities to fill competitive service positions, including conducting job analysis; public notice; accepting and processing applications; candidate assessment and referral; adjudicating veterans' preference; auditing certificates; delegated examining unit accountability responsibilities; and reporting requirements) are required to complete initial certification training and be currently certified to perform delegated examining. Individuals must successfully pass the OPM DE Certification Assessment, in accordance with the OPM Delegated Examining Certification Program Guide. Certifications are valid for three (3) years. Recertification Assessments may be taken when DE certifications are within six (6) months of expiring. Individuals must be actively conducting delegated examining activities, or be in a policy or oversight role to delegated examining, to be eligible for recertification. Failure to maintain current DE certification can jeopardize an OpDiv/StaffDiv's authority to conduct DE activities under HHS-1. For additional information, including assessment preparation, recertification, costs, etc., see the OPM Delegated Examining Certification Program Guide - PDF.
Employee Conflict of Interest. When an employee, a Subject Matter Expert (SME), an employee's relative as defined by 5 U.S.C. §3110(a)(3), or a member of an employee's household applies for a position that is being handled by the employee/SME's office, neither the employee or SME may be involved in the assessment or certification process for that position. Each OHRO conducting DE activities under HHS-1 must include this guidance in its DE SOP. At a minimum, the SOP should state that an employee must provide written notice to the servicing Human Resources Office when:
The employee or SME intends to apply for a position that is being handled by the DE unit/office in which they work, or
The employee knows that a relative or a member of his or her household intends to apply for such a position.
Job Analysis & Assessments.
Job Analysis.
A job analysis identifies job-related competencies/knowledge, skills and abilities (KSAs) and demonstrates a clear relationship between the tasks performed on the job and the competencies/KSAs required to successfully perform the tasks. The job analysis must be signed and dated by the selecting official and HR Specialist.
Job analyses for multi-grade level announcements: There should be an approved job analysis for each grade level that distinguishes the differences in job duties and job-related competencies between grade levels. In cases where a Statement of Difference(s) is used, a single job analysis may be used.
Job Assessments.
OpDivs/StaffDivs must utilize valid (i.e., job related) assessment methods to evaluate applicants in accordance with the requirements in 5 CFR Part 300, Subpart A; the DEOH, Chapter 2, Section C; and consistent with the technical standards in the Uniform Guidelines on Employee Selection Procedures (29 CFR Part 1607). Assessment questions must be based on reliable rating criteria that are fully documented by the appropriate job analysis and show a direct link to the competencies required for successful performance. Assessment tools must be job-related and should be reviewed by an Industrial Organizational (I/O) Psychologist or legal counsel prior to use to ensure they meet regulatory requirements and are a legally supportable evaluation tool. For additional guidance, see the DEOH, Chapter 2, Section C.
Administrative Careers With America (ACWA): OHROs are not required to use OPM's ACWA assessment tools for ACWA designated positions; however, they are available to fill positions covered by ACWA. See the DEOH, Chapter 2, for instructions and DEOH Appendix F, for the list of ACWA positions. Other valid assessment tool(s) may be used when filling these competitive service positions as long as they comply with the assessment requirements described above in this Instruction.
Citizenship Requirement. No individual may be appointed to a position in the competitive service unless the individual is a citizen or national of the United States, except in rare cases when approved by OPM (8 U.S.C. §1408; 5 CFR §7.3; 5 CFR §338.101; and Executive Order 11935). In addition, HHS, along with many other federal agencies receiving appropriated funds, is restricted from compensating an individual who is not a U.S. Citizen or national of the United States for any federal position. OHROs should consult their legal counsel to identify and comply with agency specific appropriations restrictions related to the hiring of individuals who are not citizens. For more information see DEOH, Chapter 4.
Acceptance of Applications.
Applications for competitive service positions are accepted according to the application procedures defined in the public notice (5 U.S.C. §§3327 and 3330, 5 CFR Part 330, Subpart A; and the DEOH, Chapter 4).
If the applicant is a 10-point preference eligible, then the applicant may file an application at any time for any position for which: a) a register is about to be established; b) a non-temporary appointment has been made in the preceding three years; or c) a list of eligibles currently exists but is closed to new applicants (5 CFR Part 332).
If the applicant is a preference eligible, the applicant is: a) entitled to be entered on an existing competitor inventory if he or she applies within 90 days after furlough or separation without delinquency or misconduct from a career or career-conditional appointment, provided he or she is otherwise qualified for the position; b) may enter an existing inventory if he or she has successfully appealed a furlough or discharge from a career or career-conditional appointment, and is otherwise qualified for the position; and c) entitled to be re-entered on each existing inventory (or its successor) on which he or she was previously listed, provided he or she applies within 90 days after resignation without delinquency or misconduct from a career or career-conditional appointment (5 CFR Part 332 ). For more information, see the DEOH, Chapter 4.
Limiting the Number of Applicants. OpDivs/StaffDivs may use the following options to manage application volume for positions that attract a high number of applicants:
Limiting the number of days a JOA is open: OpDivs/StaffDivs have the discretion to determine the length of time that a JOA is open; however, justifications for announcements open less than five (5) calendar days must be documented in the DE case file, in accordance with HHS-1 and the DEOH, Chapter 3. Justifications are based on the number, type(s), grade levels, and geographic locations of the positions being filled; labor market conditions; and recent experience (within 1 year) filling similar positions.
Limiting the number of applications received: OpDivs/StaffDivs have the discretion to set "cut-offs" or limits (e.g., the first 100 applications received) on the number of applications that they will consider when filling a position. When using such limits, OpDivs/StaffDivs shall accept any applications received up until 11:59 p.m. on the day the limit is reached in order to accommodate applicants in non-Eastern time zones.

OpDivs/StaffDivs' DE SOP must address the use of these options. When one or more of the limitations are used, they must be stated in the JOA, advertisement, or notice and justification (to limit apps) must be documented in the DE case file.
Applicant Notification. Applicants who apply through USAJOBS must receive notification through USAJOBS at each of the following four points during the application process: 1) application received; 2) application assessed for qualifications; 3) applicant referred or not referred to selecting official; and 4) applicant selected or not selected for the job (DEOH, Chapter 4).
Readvertisement of Vacancy Announcements. When announcements are re-advertised within 60 days of the closing date of the original announcement, all applicants who applied to the original announcement must be notified of the readvertisement, regardless whether there are significant changes to the announcement. (Positions re-advertised after the 60 day time frame do not require applicant notification.)
Veterans' Preference Adjudication. OHROs are responsible for ensuring veterans' preference provisions are applied in accordance with 5 U.S.C. §§3309-3319, 5 CFR Part 211, the DEOH, and this Instruction. The DEOH, Chapter 4, is followed regarding reviewing incomplete applications from preference eligibles. OpDivs/StaffDivs shall request additional information from applicants when there is conflicting documentation in their application package concerning their claimed veterans' preference (Letter from the U.S. Office of Special Counsel (OSC) to HHS Office of General Counsel, 12/12/2017). For example, in cases where the applicant submits supporting evidence that shows they are entitled to the veterans' preference, but also provides contradictory evidence that shows they are not entitled to the veterans' preference they are claiming, HR Specialists must request additional information, as necessary, to ensure veterans' preference is adjudicated properly.
Application for 10-Point Veteran Preference Eligibles. OPM issued a revised Standard Form 15 (SF-15), Application for 10-Point Veteran Preference, in October 2013. Signatures are no longer required; the form is now PDF-fillable; and veterans may file for preference if they have documentation showing they are honorably discharged or will be discharged under honorable conditions within 120 days after the date the certification is signed. The SF-15 must be collected prior to appointment.
Spousal Derived Preference Claims. OPM retains authority to determine spousal derived preference when the claim for preference is based on a claim of common law marriage (5 U.S.C. §2108(3)(D); 5 CFR 211.103). OHROs submit requests to employmentpolicy@hhs.gov for review/concurrence and OPM approval.
Physical Qualification Waivers of Preference Eligibles. OHROs will waive (5 U.S.C. §3312):
Requirement(s) concerning age, height, and weight in determining qualifications of a preference eligible, unless the requirements is/are essential to the performance of the duties of the position, and
Physical requirements if, in the opinion of the employing OpDiv/StaffDiv, after considering the recommendation of an accredited physician, the preference eligible is physically able to perform the duties of the position.
If the OHRO determines that, based on a preponderance of evidence, a preference eligible under 5 U.S.C. §2108(3)(C) who has a compensable service-connected disability of 30 percent or more is not able to fulfill the physical requirements of the position, the OHRO shall submit the request to HHS OHR Policy and Accountability Division (PAD) at employmentpolicy@hhs.gov for review/concurrence and OPM approval. PAD will subsequently notify OPM of the determination and, at the same time, the OHRO will notify the preference eligible of the reasons for the determination and of the right to respond to OPM within 15 days of the date of the notification. No correspondence is sent by the OHRO to the applicant until PAD concurrence is received. OPM will require evidence that notification was sent to the preference eligible's last known address and will make a final determination on the physical ability of the preference eligible to perform the duties of the position, taking into account any additional information provided. The OpDiv/StaffDiv will not select any other person for the position prior to receiving OPM's final determination.
Career Transition Assistance Plan (CTAP) and Interagency Career Transition Assistance Plan (ICTAP). OpDivs/StaffDivs must provide priority selection to qualified CTAP and ICTAP candidates when filling positions under delegated examining procedures. OHROs retain written documentation to demonstrate CTAP and ICTAP clearance. (HHS Instruction 330-2, Priority Placement Programs, and 5 CFR 330, Subparts F and G)
Reemployment Priority List (RPL). OpDivs/StaffDivs must provide priority selection to qualified HHS RPL candidates when filling positions under delegated examining procedures. OHROs retain written documentation to demonstrate RPL clearance. (HHS Instruction 330-2, Priority Placement Programs, and 5 CFR 330, Subpart B)
Category Rating. Qualified applicants for permanent, term, and temporary positions in the competitive service are assessed using category rating procedures. Category rating is a method of evaluating candidates who meet eligibility and minimum qualification requirements for the position by assessing the applicants' experience, education, and training and placing them into pre-defined "quality categories" rather than assigning individual numerical scores. Category rating is synonymous with alternative rating described in 5 U.S.C. §3319. For additional guidance, see the DEOH, Chapter 5.
Quality Categories: The HHS quality categories are Best Qualified, Well Qualified, and Qualified. Each category represents a grouping of candidates with similar levels of job-related knowledge, skills, abilities (KSAs) or competencies. Applicants are assessed and placed into categories based on their job-related competencies/KSAs and any applicable selective placement factors.
Category Rating Procedures: OpDiv/StaffDiv category rating procedures must be documented and adhere to the following requirements:
Quality categories are Best Qualified, Well Qualified, and Qualified.
Categories cannot include a "Not Qualified" category.
Categories are defined in an OpDiv/StaffDiv's DE SOP and/or DE case file through job analysis. Definitions should be written to reflect the requirements of the position. The quality categories must be defined prior to announcing the job, and each category should have a clear definition that distinguishes it from the other categories.
Quality categories may be defined using numerical scores (i.e., a range of scores to define each quality category). For example, scores of 95-100 to represent the "Best-Qualified" category, scores of 85-94 are "Well Qualified," and scores of 70-84 are "Qualified." Such rating criteria must adhere to the technical standards in the Uniform Guidelines (29 CFR Part 1607) and the Job Analysis and Assessments guidance in this Instruction to ensure it complies with merit staffing laws and regulations (DEOH, Chapter 5).
Each quality category definition must be included in the vacancy announcement, along with a description of how veterans' preference is applied under category rating procedures.
A numerical ranking process, or the "rule of three," does not apply to category rating.
Issuing Certificates.
HHS DE certificates are open for 240 calendar days, with no extensions. CTAP, ICTAP, and the RPL must be cleared at initial announcement, in accordance with HHS Instruction 330-2, Priority Placement Programs.
Names of qualified candidates are listed in alphabetic order, with preference eligibles listed ahead of non-preference eligibles, within each quality category. Veterans' preference applies to each category; however, points are not assigned. Qualified preference eligibles with a compensable service-connected disability of 10 percent or more (i.e., CP and CPS) are listed in the highest quality category, except for scientific and professional positions at General Schedule (GS)-9 level or higher.
All candidates in the highest quality category are referred, with veteran preference eligibles listed ahead of non-veterans. If there are fewer than three (3) candidates in the highest category, the highest and second highest categories may be merged before a certificate is issued or a selection is made.
Only preference eligible candidates in the highest quality category are referred when it is apparent that non-preference eligible candidates are not within reach for selection, or when there are a sufficient number of preference eligible candidates to consider to fill the vacant position(s).
Order of selection:
CTAP candidates;
RPL candidates
ICTAP candidates;
Eligibles who lost consideration due to erroneous certification;
Eligibles in the highest quality category (including CPS and CP veterans); and
Eligibles in other quality categories, as needed.
The Indian Health Service must give selection priority in accordance with 25 U.S.C. §5117 prior to applying veterans' preference provisions.
If there are only preference eligibles or only non-preference eligibles in the highest quality category, the hiring manager may select any eligible candidate in the highest quality category.
Selecting officials may not select a non-preference eligible if there is a qualified preference eligible in the same category unless an approval to pass over the preference eligible is obtained in accordance with the Pass Overs and Objections of Preference Eligibles procedures below. If a request to pass over a veteran has been submitted, selection(s) may be made once approval is received from either the OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Director (for pass overs and objections not requiring OPM approval) or OPM (for pass overs and objections requiring OPM approval).
Pass Overs and Objections of Preference Eligibles.
Pass Overs and Objections Not Requiring OPM Approval
OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Directors (HRDs) may approve or deny objection or pass over requests of preference eligibles with less than 30 percent compensable service-connected disability, or an applicant with derived preference, for competitive service positions within their organization. This authority may not be redelegated below the OpDiv/StaffDiv HRD level.
A copy of the HRD's approval must be sent to HHS OHR Policy and Accountability Division (PAD) within 14 calendar days of the date of approval, via employmentpolicy@hhs.gov, and include the following supporting documentation:
SF-62, Agency Request to Passover a Preference Eligible or Object to an Eligible, signed by the HRD;
Resume/Application Package, including documents supporting veterans' preference claim;
Copy of Position Description;
Copy of Vacancy Announcement;
Certificate of Eligibles; and
A memorandum approved by the HR Director with a description of the reason sufficient to sustain an objection/pass over.
Pass Overs and Objections Requiring OPM Approval
The following objection and pass over requests require OPM approval, and must be submitted to PAD, before making selections:
A pass over of any preference eligible with a 30 percent or more compensable service-connected disability, in accordance with 5 USC §3318(c)(2)  and the OPM Vet Guide;
A pass over of a preference eligible based on medical disqualification, in accordance with 5 CFR Part 339, specifically 5 CFR §§339.201 and 339.306 ; and
Objections based on suitability for federal employment for positions in the competitive service and excepted service positions, if the excepted service authority or position authorizes non-competitive conversion to the competitive service, as specified under 5 CFR §731.101 .
The same documentation listed in Q.1.b. above is submitted to PAD at employmentpolicy@hhs.gov for review/concurrence and OPM approval.
No correspondence is sent to a 30 percent or more compensable disabled applicant until PAD concurrence is received. Once PAD concurrence is received, the OHRO sends a notice to the CPS candidate and submits a copy of the sent notice to employmentpolicy@hhs.gov. Information that must be included in notice(s) is outlined in the DEOH, Chapter 6.
Only after OPM has approved the pass over of the preference eligible may the 30 percent or more compensable disabled veteran be passed over and another applicant selected.
Direct Hire Authority.
A Direct Hire Authority (DHA) (5 CFR Part 337, Subpart B) permits an agency to hire, after public notice, any qualified applicant without regard to 5 U.S.C. §§3309-3318 , 5 CFR Part 211, or 5 CFR Part 337, Subpart A, to fill competitive service positions at GS-15 and below.
A DHA expedites hiring by eliminating category rating and veterans' preference; however, public notice requirements outlined in 5 U.S.C. §§3327  and 3330 , and 5 CFR Part 330, Subpart A, must be followed when filling positions under a DHA (5 CFR §337.203). Applicants who apply during an open vacancy announcement may be considered, per the DEOH, Chapter 2. Priority selection under 5 CFR Part 330 (CTAP/ICTAP) must also be given to eligible applicants.
Selectee(s) must meet all eligibility and qualification requirements for the position.
Executive agencies with delegated examining authority, such as HHS, may use a government-wide DHA. For available government-wide DHAs, see OPM.gov. OPM may also grant an agency-specific DHA to address a critical hiring need or a severe shortage of candidates.
OHROs must submit the following information to request an OpDiv/StaffDiv-specific direct hire authority:
Position title(s), series, grade level(s), and locations(s) covered;
Type of DHA requested (severe shortage of candidates or critical hiring need);
Proposed duration of the DHA and an explanation why this period is needed;
Evidence described in 5 CFR §§337.204 or 337.205 to support a DHA based on a severe shortage of candidates or critical hiring need, and explain how the evidence establishes a severe shortage of candidates or critical hiring need, as defined under 5 CFR §337.202 for the positions requested (for additional guidance, see DEOH, Chapter 2, and OPM.gov);
Identify a point of contact for questions and requests for further information; and
Send the request to the HHS OHR Policy and Accountability Division (PAD) at employmentpolicy@hhs.gov for review/concurrence and OPM approval.
Two (2) authority codes must be used when processing DHA personnel actions, in accordance with the DEOH and OPM Guide to Processing Personnel Actions, Chapter 9, Career and Career-Conditional Appointments.
PAD, on behalf of OPM, may request information from OpDivs/StaffDivs on their use of direct hire authorities (5 CFR §337.206(c)).
Reconsideration of Ratings. OpDiv/StaffDivs must develop internal procedures for applicants to request an appeal or reconsideration of ratings , in accordance with the DEOH, Chapter 5, Section C, Appeal of Rating:
Applicant Responsibilities:
The applicant's request must be made in writing and indicate why the applicant believes the original decision is inaccurate.
Upon receipt of the OHRO's decision, the applicant may submit a second level appeal to a designated official within the OHRO. (The result of the second level appeal is final. The applicant may not appeal to OPM.)
OpDiv/StaffDiv Responsibilities:
Make its internal appeal procedures available to applicants who wish to challenge an assigned rating, and advise the applicant that the results of the appeal could result in a higher, lower, or same score.
The OHRO that made the original decision conducts the review.
A DE certified staff member other than the person who made the original decision must conduct the review.
Reply in writing to the applicant's request with a full explanation of the reasons for the decision, without compromising the rating schedule.
Follow the guidance in the DEOH, Chapter 5, and this Instruction (see Erroneous Certification and Priority Consideration below, if applicable) when the review results in a changed rating.
Auditing Certificates. This important accountability process certifies the action taken by hiring managers on returned certificates of eligibles, and ensures compliance with Department policy, as well as legal and regulatory merit staffing procedures. Certificates must be audited prior to the selectee's entrance-on-duty date by another DE-certified HR Specialist and must comply with this Instruction and DEOH, Chapter 6, Section C. In cases where the vacancy announcement has been canceled but a certificate was issued, the certificate must still be audited. Certificates must be annotated to reflect selections, and declinations or any failed to reply actions. Acceptable documentation from the hiring manager can be in the form of a signature on the actual certificate; an email; an electronic certificate; or a manager's statement on the system-generated email to the servicing HR Specialist. All declinations and withdrawals from consideration must be documented in the DE case file or in USAStaffing.
Erroneous Certification and Priority Consideration. In the event an OHRO discovers an error that resulted in a selection in violation of the selection rules, corrective action must be taken to resolve the error. The instructions in the DEOH, Chapter 6, Section E, are followed to determine if applicants lost consideration and to correct (regularize) any erroneous appointments. The OHRO who made the error must give priority consideration for future vacancies within their OpDiv/StaffDiv to all applicants who lost consideration due to an illegal selection. When a violation of law or an illegal appointment is identified, OHROs must immediately notify the HHS OHR Policy and Accountability Division (PAD). Variation request(s) to provide service credit for the period incumbent(s) were on an illegal appointment, or to retain incumbent(s) appointed erroneously, must be submitted to PAD for review/concurrence and OPM approval.
1104-1-60 Documentation and Accountability
Records associated with hiring actions must be retained in individual recruitment case files, or USAStaffing, to allow for third-party reconstruction. Records associated with personnel actions, including all documentation sufficient for third party reconstruction purposes, must be retained according to the DEOH's Records Retention and Disposition Schedule - PDF (DEOH, Appendix C). Generally, records created in a given year must be retained for a total of three (3) full years. Records involved in litigation and grievance processes may be destroyed only after official notification is received from OPM, Department of Justice, courts, the Office of the General Counsel, etc. that the matter has been fully litigated, or resolved, and closed.
HHS OHR Policy and Accountability Division (PAD) or OPM will conduct annual accountability reviews to ensure compliance with this Instruction, HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations. Audits will be conducted by DE certified staff external to the OpDiv/StaffDiv, in accordance with the requirements described in HHS-1 and the DEOH.






















OPM/HHS Interagency Delegated Examining Agreement 2011


Interagency Delegated Examining Agreement
Interagency Agreement Number (HHS-1)
Between the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) and the Department of Health and Human Services
This document is a two-part agreement between the above-named parties which contains a delegation of examining authority and establishes the terms and conditions for agency use of OPM-developed examining instruments.

I. The Delegation Agreement
A. Authority
Under 5 U.S.C. § 1104, as amended by Public law 104-52 (1995), this lnteragency Delegated Examining Agreement authorizes the Department  of Health and Human Services to examine applicants for positions at Department of Health and Human Services or for positions at ano\her Federal agency that itself has executed a delegated examining agreement with OPM. OPM delegates examining authority at the headquarters level. Although Department of Health and Human Services may decide which activity {i.e., component or office of Department of Health and Human Services) carries out this authority and the extent to which the activity exercises it, the authority itself may not be re-delegated.

B. Positions Covered
Title 5 competitive service positions for all series and grade levels nationwide except Administrative Law Judge positions.

C. Effective Date of the Agreement
This Agreement will become effective upon execution by both parties.

D. Applicable Laws and Regulations
All examining activities initiated under this Agreement must conform to the requirements of Federal laws, rules, regulations, Executive Orders, applicable court orders, and, where applicable, specific operational procedures prescribed in the Delegated Examining Operations Handbook.

E. Responsibilities of the Parties
1. OPM Responsibilities

OPM will:

Provide operating guidelines and basic technical assistance through training and the Delegated Examining Operations Handbook.
Perform initial certification and periodic recertification training of staff.
Provide job seekers with up-to-date information about job opportunities and application procedures through the USAJOBS Governmentwide automated employment information systems.
Retain exclusive authority to:
Make medical qualification determinations pertaining to preference eligibles (5 CFR 339.306), including review of a proposed disqualification of a 30 percent or more compensably disabled veteran on the basis of physical disability under 5 U.S.C. § 3312(b).
Make suitability determinations and take suitability actions involving material, intentional false statement or deception or fraud in examination or appointment, or refusal to furnish testimony as required by 5 CFR 5.4 (5 CFR 731.103(a)).
Grant or deny an agency's pass over request of a preference eligible with a compensable service-connected disability of 30 percent or more (5 U.S.C. § 3318).
Make determinations on spousal derived veterans' preference claims where the claim for preference is based on a claim of common law marriage (5 U.S.C. § 2108(3)(D), (E); 5 CFR 211.103).
Establish and maintain an oversight program to ensure that activities, including any competitive examining work performed for the agency (i) through the use of contractors under any authority delegated under 5 U.S.C. § 1104(a), or (ii) by another agency, on a reimbursable basis, under the Economy Act, are in accordance with the merit system principles and the performance standards established by OPM under 5.U.S.C. § 1104(b)(1), and support mission accomplishment. The agency making the appointment must be accountable for the work performed on its behalf and must itself make each appointment and execute the documents evidencing the appointment. Any actions contrary to any law, rule, regulation, or any OPM established standard shall be corrected as required by OPM. (5 U.S.C. § 1104(c)). OPM reserves the right to order any corrective action, to suspend or withdraw any authority delegated by OPM to an agency, or to suspend or revoke this delegation agreement as described in 5 CFR 250.103.
2. Agency Responsibilities

Department of Health and Human Services will:

Ensure adequate competition for positions in the competitive service by recruiting sufficient numbers of well-qualified candidates for consideration.
Provide public notice of the opportunity to compete by listing all announcements for vacant competitive service positions in USAJOBS, a Governmentwide automated employment information system. To comply with its obligations under 5 U.S.C. §§ 3327 and 3330 to establish and keep current a comprehensive list of all announcements for vacant positions in the competitive service, OPM uses USAJOBS. Accordingly, Department of Health and Human Services must also use USAJOBS when exercising its delegated authority under this Agreement.
Determine appropriate public notice and length of open periods for receipt of applications by considering the nature of the positions covered by the examination, their career potential and the mobility/availability characteristics of the appropriate labor market Notice periods of less than 5 calendar days must be documented in the examining file to show the examining office's rationale. OPM transmits public notice material electronically to State employment service offices nationwide.
Use streamlined job opportunity announcements that are written in clear, concise, and plain language.
Establish policies and procedures on the acceptance and processing of applications, including the use of resumes to establish minimum qualifications eligibility/ineligibility. Filing instructions and conditions must be specified clearly in the job announcement.
Develop applicant assessment procedures. (5 CFR part 300, subpart A)
Use valid assessment tools, excluding written essays or narratives of competencies/knowledge, skills, and abilities (KSAs) at the initial stage of the application process.
Obtain prior approval from OPM before modifying standards in the Operating Manual, Qualification Standards for General Schedule Positions, unless such modifications are otherwise authorized in the General Policies and Instructions section of the Manual.
Rate applications and notify applicants of the status of their applications at key stages of the application process.
Provide a procedure for applicants to request reconsideration of their ratings. The Agency must:
Refer to OPM any request to pass over a 30 percent or more compensably disabled veteran.
Refer to OPM any objection or pass over request that is based on material, intentional false statement or deception or fraud in examination or appointment for review and adjudication under 5 CFR part 731, where appropriate.
Refer other cases to OPM for suitability review as prescribed by 5 CFR 731.103{a)-(b).
Refer to OPM for review and final approval determinations of ineligibility based on medical considerations as prescribed by 5 U.S.G. § 3312(b) and 5 CFR 339.306(b).
Make determinations on veterans' preference claims, including claims for spouse or mother preference based on the service-connected disability of a veteran, except for spousal derived preference based on a claim of common law marriage, which must be referred to OPM's General Counsel.
Administer and score written tests. Individuals administering OPM tests must be trained and certified by OPM.
Issue certificates of eligibles and audit certificates, and establish objection/pass over procedures. OPM retains exclusive authority to:
Make medical qualification determinations pertaining to preference eligibles (5 CFR 339.306), including review of a proposed disqualification of a 30 percent or more compensably disabled veteran on the basis of physical disability under 5 U.S.C. § 3312(b).
Make suitability determinations and take suitability actions involving material, intentional false statement or deception or fraud in examination or appointment, or refusal to furnish testimony as required by 5 CFR 5.4 (5 CFR 731.103(a)).
Grant or deny an agency's pass over request of a preference eligible with a compensable service-connected disability of 30 percent or more (5 U.S.C. § 3318).
Make determinations on spousal derived veterans' preference claims where the claim for preference is based on a claim of common law marriage (5 U.S.C. § 2108(3)(0), (E); 5 CFR 211.103).
Apply veterans' preference provisions of title 5, United States Code, including, but not limited to:
5 U.S.C. § 3305   (Competitive service; examinations; when held)
5 U.S.C. § 3309   (Preference eligibles; examinations; additional points for)
5 U.S.C. § 3311   (Preference eligibles; examinations; crediting experience)
5 U.S.C. § 3313   (Competitive service; registers of eligibles)
5 U.S.C. § 3314   (Registers; preference eligibles who resigned)
5 U.S.C. § 3315   (Registers; preference eligibles furloughed or separated)
5 U.S.C. § 3317   (Competitive service; certification from registers)
5 U.S.C. § 3318   (Competitive service; selection from certificates)
5 U.S.C. § 3319   (Alternative ranking and selection procedures)
Approve selective and quality-ranking factors identified and documented through analysis of the position. (5 CFR 300.103)
Make determinations on conversion to career or career-conditional appointment. (5 CFR 315.703)
Make determinations on exceptions to the time-in-grade restriction when an employee is within reach on a register for competitive appointment to the position to be filled. (5 CFR 300.603)
Make determinations on exceptions to time-after-competitive appointment restriction. (5 CFR 330.501)
Operate examining activities in conformance with the agency's career transition assistance plan. (5 CFR 330 subpart F)
Provide for a procedure whereby staff involved in delegated examining activities notifies their supervisor in writing when they intend to apply for a position covered by this Agreement that is handled by the delegated examining organization where they work. Employees must give similar notice if they know that a relative or a member of their household intends to apply.  Such employees should be appropriately monitored or segregated from the examining and certification process. This procedure also applies to subject matter experts who participate in the development of assessments or ranking of candidates.
Develop and print any forms necessary for examining operations. Forms that collect information directly from the public must be cleared with the Office of Management and Budget (0MB). (See 5 CFR part 1320 or Standard Form 83-A)
Ensure that maintenance of the records used to implement the delegation of authority, which are to be maintained as a system of records subject to the Privacy Act, is consistent with OPM's Governmentwide system of records (OPM/GOVT-5) and the Privacy Act. Any request for changes to the OPM system notices or regulations may be submitted, through the agency headquarters, to the Associate Director for Employee Services, U.S. Office of Personnel Management, Washington, DC 20415.
Adhere to OPM's schedule of records retention/disposition.
Provide quarterly reports to OPM on such measures as will be required by OPM to fulfill its oversight and program management responsibility.
Take such corrective action as OPM may require. (5 U.S.C. § 1104(c))
Establish and maintain an internal accountability system designed to assure that the use of delegated examining authorities is in compliance with law and merit system principles. This system will be subject to regular periodic management review by OPM.
Conduct annual audits of delegated examining activities using staff not associated with delegated examining activities and certify completion of the audit to OPM. Department of Health and Human Services must maintain a list of all discrepancies and corrective actions for a period of 3 years after the audit. Annual audit procedures may be incorporated into the agency's internal accountability system.
Notify OPM of changes in delegated examining offices, including new delegated examining offices, termination, etc.
bb. Ensure that individuals responsible for delegated examining activities, including those conducting the annual audits, have completed initial certification training and are currently certified to perform this work.

cc. To the extent any of the work described above is performed by a contractor or another agency operating pursuant to an Economy Act arrangement, be accountable for the work performed on the undersigned agency's behalf, ensure that appointments are actually made by the undersigned agency itself, and ensure that the documents necessary to evidence such appointments are signed by officials of the undersigned agency itself.

F. Termination, Suspension or Revocation
This Agreement may be terminated at any time by either party with 90 days advance notice to the other party. If this Agreement is terminated, Department of Health and Human Services will not be permitted to fill positions using competitive examining procedures.
Certification of a delegated examining activity may be revoked or suspended at any time by OPM. Such revocation or suspension is effective as of the date of notice from OPM.
G. Amendment or Modification
Any amendment or modification of this Agreement must be in writing and agreed to by both OPM and Department of Health and Human Services. This Agreement will be automatically renewed each fiscal year unless a termination notice is provided by one party to the other party.

H. Severability Clause or Provision
If any clause or provision of this Agreement is terminated, or is determined to be illegal; Invalid or unenforceable, then that clause or provision shall be severed from this Agreement and the remainder of this Agreement shall remain in full force and effect.

/s/
Nancy H. Kichak
Associate Director
Employee Services
U.S. Office of Personnel Management
1900 E Street, NW, Room 6500
Washington, DC 20415

3-3-10
(Date)

/s/
Antonia T. Harris
Associate Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources
Department of Health and Human Services
ASAM/OHR
200 Independence Ave. SW, Room 300E
Washington, DC 20201

3-22-11
(Date)

II. Special Provisions Governing Use of Administrative Careers With America (ACWA) Examining Instruments or Other Examining Instruments Developed By OPM
Agencies at their option, and as indicated below, may request and use an OPM-developed examining instrument, including the Administrative Careers With America (ACWA) instruments (written test and/or rating schedule), which OPM developed-for certain entry-level positions. Once an agency exercises this option, the agency is responsible for correct usage of these materials, in accordance with the conditions established below.

A. Prohibition on Modifications
No modification of the content of the instruments or values used in the scoring process is permitted. The instruments must be used intact.

B. Test Security Requirements
Agencies are required to comply with OPM test security requirements, use only trained test administrators, and report test material compromises to OPM's Nationwide Testing Office, 230 South Dearborn Street, Suite 3040, Chicago, IL 60604 or midwesttesting@oprri.gov.

C. Reproduction and Distribution
Agencies are responsible for all reproduction and distribution of examining material within their organizations. Reproduction must be in accordance with Government wide requirements relating to such material.

D. Termination of This Special Agreement
OPM reserves the right to terminate this special Agreement at any time for violations of any of the requirements listed above.

E. Agency Contact
Agencies are required to submit a point of contact (including Name, Address, Telephone Number, and E-mail Address) for the OPM-developed examining instrument(s) (written test and/or rating schedule) the agency uses. Agencies are responsible for updating any changes to the point of contact.

F. Agency Decision
This agency requests the use of an OPM-developed examining instrument (written test and/or rating schedule).

-------------------------------------------------------------
(Signature)
Department of Health and Human Services

-------------------------------------------------------------
Date

 

This agency does not request the use of an OPM-developed examining instrument (written test and/or rating schedule).

 






















OHR Guidance, Attorneys, Law Clerks, and Legal Interns
A. Purpose
This guidance is provided to establish attorney positions; attorney qualification standards; and mandatory recruitment procedures when filling Attorney and Law Clerk positions, consistent with HHS and Office of Personnel Management (OPM) policy, procedures and guidance, and applicable federal laws and regulations. Temporary Legal Intern positions filled via the Pathways Programs are also covered.

When provisions of this guidance differ from changes in applicable law or regulation, the changes in law or regulation apply.

B. Coverage
This guidance covers HHS-wide Attorney and Law Clerk positions (Schedule A, 5 CFR
§213.3102 (d) and (e)), as well as Legal Intern NTE (Temporary) positions (Schedule D, 5 CFR §213.3402(a)) in the excepted service.

The provisions of this guidance pertaining to conditions of employment of bargaining unit employees (e.g., the filling of a position within the scope of the bargaining unit, promotion and reassignments, and adverse actions) are fully negotiable in accordance with 5 U.S.C. Chapter 71. Therefore, when the provisions of this guidance differ from the requirements contained in applicable collective bargaining agreement(s), the agreement takes precedence for bargaining unit employees.

C. References
5 U.S.C. §2108, Veteran; disabled veteran; preference eligible 
5 U.S.C. §2301. Merit System Principles - PDF
5 U.S.C. §2302. Prohibited Personnel Practices - PDF
5 U.S.C. §7511, Definition of Employee, adverse actions - PDF
5 CFR §213, Excepted Service
5 CFR §213.104, Special provisions for temporary, time-limited, intermittent, or seasonal appointments in Schedule A, B, C, or D
5 CFR §302.101(c), Positions exempt from appointment procedures
5 CFR §362, Subpart B, Pathways Programs, Internship Program
5 CFR §531.212, Superior Qualifications and Special Needs Pay Setting Authority
HHS Instruction 302-1, Employment in the Excepted Service
HHS Instruction 315-2, Probationary & Trial Periods
HHS Instruction 330-2, Priority Placement Programs (CTAP, ICTAP, RPL, PRL)
HHS Instruction 362-1, Pathways Programs
HHS Instruction 511-1, Position Classification
HHS Instruction 531-1, Setting Pay Based on Superior Qualifications and Special Needs - PDF
D. Responsibilities
HHS Office of General Counsel (OGC):
Provides all legal advice and services to agency officials within the Department. See HHS/OS/OGC Statement of Organization. By serving as the sole, officially designated source of legal advice to the Department, OGC ensures that all offices (including Operating and Staff Divisions (OpDivs and StaffDivs)) receive uniform advice and that OGC and the Department of Justice are able to defend the agency’s legal position.
Approves the establishment of Attorney (GS-0905) positions at any grade level, both within and outside of OGC.
Approves requests to credit certain special qualifications in lieu of one (1) year of legal experience.
HHS Assistant Secretary for Administration, Office of Human Resources (ASA OHR):
Develops Department-wide human resources guidance and policy consistent with HHS and OPM policy, procedures and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Reviews OpDiv/StaffDiv requests to establish Attorney (GS-0905) positions at any grade level, then forwards to OGC for approval.
Reviews OpDiv/StaffDiv requests to credit certain special qualifications in lieu of one (1) year of legal experience, then forwards to OGC for approval.
Periodically reviews Operating Division and Staff Division (OpDiv/StaffDiv) procedures, actions, and reports to ensure conformance with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
OpDiv and StaffDiv Human Resources (HR) Centers:
Comply with this guidance, and applicable HHS policy, federal laws and regulations.
Submit requests to OGC thru ASA OHR for approval to establish Attorney (GS-0905) positions at any grade level, following the procedures in this guidance.
Submit requests to OGC thru ASA OHR for approval to credit certain special qualifications in lieu of one (1) year of legal experience.
E. Definitions
Attorney. A legal position involved in the practice of law. An Attorney’s duties may include rendering legal advice and services with respect to questions, regulations, practices, or other legal matters falling within the purview of a federal agency; preparing and reviewing interpretive and administrative orders, rules, or regulations to give effect to the provisions of governing status or other requirements of law; negotiating or examining contracts or other legal documents required by the agency’s activities; drafting, preparing formal comments, or otherwise making substantive recommendations with respect to proposed legislation; editing and preparing for publication statutes enacted by Congress and opinions or decisions of a court, commission, or board; and drafting and reviewing decisions for consideration and adoption by agency officials. Attorneys also represent HHS in administrative litigation before various administrative adjudicatory agencies and assist the Department of Justice with litigation in Federal court.
Law Clerk. Graduates of recognized law schools. Appointments may be made for periods not to exceed 14 months pending admission to the bar. No person may be given more than one law clerk appointment; however, an appointment that was made for less than 14 months may be extended for not to exceed 14 months in total duration (5 CFR §213.3102 (e)).
Legal Intern NTE (Temporary). Students at accredited law schools who are candidates for Juris Doctorate (J.D.), Bachelor of Laws (LL.B.), or Master of Law (LL.M.) degrees may be appointed as Legal Interns under the Pathways Programs (5 CFR §362, Subpart B and HHS Instruction 362-1, Pathways Programs), up to GS-12 grade level, for a period not to exceed one (1) year.
License to Practice Law. A current, valid license with eligibility to practice law in a state, the District of Columbia, or any United States territory or commonwealth is a continuing condition of employment for Federal attorneys.
Excepted Service Positions. Civil service positions which are not in the competitive service or in the Senior Executive Services (SES) that are authorized and specifically excepted from the competitive service by statute, the President, or OPM. Attorney, Law Clerk and Legal Intern positions are in the excepted service.
F. Qualification Requirements
HHS Minimum Qualification Criteria for Attorney and Law Clerk Positions. OPM delegates responsibility for establishing qualification standards for Attorney (0905) and Law Clerk (0904) positions to agencies.
Education Requirement: HHS Attorney and Law Clerk positions have a minimum requirement of a Juris Doctorate (J.D.) or Bachelor of Laws (LL.B.) from an accredited school.
Bar Membership: HHS Attorney positions require current active bar membership. Admission to the bar of any State, territory, Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, District of Columbia, or Federal Court is acceptable. Employees must maintain active bar membership while employed as an attorney with HHS. Active bar membership is verified prior to appointment.
Law school graduates who have not yet been admitted to the bar and who have not served in a judicial clerkship may be temporarily employed at HHS as a Law Clerk at the GS-11 level, not to exceed 14 months. Law school graduates who have not yet been admitted to the bar and who have served at least one year in a judicial clerkship may be temporarily employed as a Law Clerk at the GS-12 level, not to exceed 14 months. The 14-month time limit is total duration, including any extensions (5 CFR §213.3102(e)).
Special Qualifications for Attorneys. At the discretion of the General Counsel, one (1) year of legal experience may be credited if an applicant possesses any one or combination of the following special qualifications:
One year of post-law school graduate law study (Full-time or equivalent) related to position for which the candidate is being considered (LLM, combined JD/MPH, combined JD/MBA, or equivalent);
One year experience serving in a legal fellowship related to the position for which the candidate is being considered;
One year of significant non-legal work experience in a field related to the position for which the candidate is being considered (e.g., working with a Federal Acquisition Regulation, or Equal Employment Opportunity regulations, or other work experience directly applicable to the work of the position for which the candidate is being considered);
One year of post-law school judicial clerkship experience (full-time or equivalent); or
Outstanding academic experience and achievement, to include awards, recognitions and honors bestowed by an academic institution; participation in a clinical program with limited practice of law (typically in third year) or community service legal clinic; participation in moot court and/or other similar competitions (e.g., negotiation, mock trial, client counseling, appellate advocacy, writing, etc.); completion of specialized certificate/curriculum programs designed to build and enhance critical professional legal skills (such as Pathways to Success Professionalism, Health Law and Policy, Indian Law, Employment Law, Trial Advocacy).
Qualification Requirements for Legal Interns NTE (Temporary Appointments). Students at accredited law schools who are candidates for J.D., LL.B., or LL.M. degrees may be appointed as Legal Interns up to GS-12 grade level for a period not to exceed one (1) year under the Pathways Programs Internship Program, if they meet the Pathways Programs eligibility and qualification requirements under 5 CFR §362.203(b) and the OPM Qualification Standards for Pathways Programs Intern Positions - PDF. See HHS Instruction 362-1, Pathways Programs, for information on eligibility, qualifications, and training requirements; recruitment; compensation; program extensions; breaks in program; and noncompetitive conversion to competitive service positions (5 CFR Part 362). Regulations do not permit conversion to excepted service positions.
HHS Attorney and Law Clerk Qualification Requirements*
GS Level	J.D. or LL.B	Bar Membership	Legal Experience Requirements
GS-9 and GS-11 (Attorney)	Required	Required	None
GS-11 (Law Clerk)	Required	 Not Required	Law school graduates who have not yet been admitted to the bar and who have not served in a judicial clerkship may be temporarily employed at the GS-11 level, NTE 14 months (5 CFR
§213.3102(e))
GS-12 (Attorney)	Required	Required	1 year of professional legal experience post bar admission equivalent to the GS- 11 level
GS-12 (Law Clerk)	Required	 Not Required	Law school graduates who have not yet been admitted to the bar and who have served at least one year in a judicial clerkship may be temporarily employed at the GS-12 level, NTE 14 months (5 CFR §213.3102(e))
GS-13 (Attorney)	Required	Required	2 years of professional legal experience post bar admission, with one year of experience equivalent to the GS-12 level
GS-14 (Attorney)	Required	Required	3 years of professional legal experience post bar admission with one year of experience equivalent to the GS-13 level
GS-15 (Attorney)	Required	Required	4 years of professional legal experience post bar admission with one year of experience equivalent to the GS-14 level
* OPM does not issue qualification standards for Attorney (0905) and Law Clerk (0904) positions and delegates responsibility to agencies.

* Interns (0999) are evaluated against the OPM Schedule D Group Qualification Standards for Intern positions - PDF (5 CFR 362.203(c)) and HHS Instruction 362-1, Pathways Programs).

Superior Qualifications and Special Needs to Support an Advanced Rate of Pay at Initial Appointment. Consistent with 5 C.F.R. § 531.212 and HHS Instruction 531-1, Setting Pay Based on Superior Qualifications and Special Needs, at the discretion of the General Counsel (or delegate), a candidate may be offered an advanced rate of pay beyond step 1, if the General Counsel (or delegate) determines the candidate has superior qualifications or skills directly related to the position being filled or based on organizational need, as described below. Such qualifications must be significantly higher than needed to be considered minimally qualified for the position (see Table above) and/or be of a more specialized quality compared to other candidates, in accordance with 5 CFR 531.212(b)(1)). OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Centers are the final approving authority.
Experience in legal practice in a field related to the position for which the candidate is being considered (e.g., litigation, contracts, health care reimbursement, food and drug law, federal or state advocacy experience);
Significant non-legal work experience in a field related to the position for which the candidate is being considered (e.g., working with a Federal Acquisition Regulation, health care, tribal negotiations, or Equal Employment Opportunity regulations or leading complex quasi-legal investigations, or other work experience directly applicable to the work of the position for which the attorney is being hired);
Outstanding academic experience and achievement, to include a combination of awards, recognitions and honors bestowed by an academic institution; participation in clinical program with limited practice of law (typically in third year) or community service legal clinic; participation in moot court and/or other similar competitions (e.g., negotiation, mock trial, client counseling, appellate advocacy, writing) and/or completion of specialized Certificate/Curriculum programs designed to build and enhance critical professional legal skills (such as Pathways to Success Professionalism, Heath Law and Policy, Indian Law, Trial Advocacy);
Success of recent efforts to recruit candidates for the same or similar positions; recent turnover in the same or similar positions; desirability of the geographic location, duties, and/or work environment associated with the position; the importance/criticality of the position to be filled and the effect on the agency if it is not filled or if there is a delay in filling it; or other factors affecting ability to successfully recruit and/or retain candidates for the position;
Significant disparities between Federal and non-Federal salaries for the skills and competencies required in the position to be filled; or existing labor market conditions and employment trends, including the availability and quality of candidates for the same or similar positions; and/or
OGC workforce needs, as documented in OGC’s strategic human capital plan.
Managers who wish to recommend a candidate for a step level above step 1, must include the recommended step in the initial written hiring recommendation to the General Counsel (or delegate). The recommendation should specifically address the factors above as they relate to the candidate and the office’s recruitment efforts, and reasons why pay should be set above the minimum rate of pay (step), instead of/in addition to a recruitment incentive (5 CFR 531.212(d). If approved, the manager should work with the OGC Office of Legal Resources (OLR) regarding any additional procedures required.

G. Approval Process for Newly Established Attorney Positions
Concurrence from OGC is required for the establishment of Attorney (0905) positions at any grade level, both within and outside of OGC.
When requesting establishment of a new Attorney (0905) position at any grade level:
The OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Centers review requests to establish a new Attorney (0905) position within their division. The request must include a position description (PD).
In the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the Office of Chief Counsel reports to the OGC’s Food and Drug Division and seeks approval directly from the OGC. However, all other FDA Centers/Offices outside the OGC’s Food and Drug Division must obtain written approval following the steps outlined in this guidance.
If the position meets the criteria for an Attorney (General Attorney (0905) series definition - PDF), the HR Center submits the following information to ASA OHR at employmentpolicy@hhs.gov:
Signed cover memorandum from HR Director endorsing the request and requesting OGC’s review and approval;
Justification that describes the need for the position; and
PD signed by the requesting authority.
ASA OHR reviews and submits the information outlined above to OGC for concurrence, as required by HHS Instruction 511-1, Position Classification.
OGC reviews the request and concurs or denies the request with a written explanation within 30 calendar days.
OGC returns the approved or denied request to ASA OHR at employmentpolicy@hhs.gov for record keeping purposes. ASA OHR notifies requesting HR Center.
All documentation, including OGC concurrence must be attached to the PD and maintained with the HR Center for future reference as long as the position remains active.
If an approved position is vacated and the PD and organization remains the same, the OpDiv/StaffDiv has the authority to backfill the position without additional approval.
H. Recruitment
Hiring Authorities.
Attorney and Law Clerk positions are Schedule A excepted service positions appointed under 5 CFR §213.3101(d) and (e) respectively.
Legal Intern NTE (Temporary) positions are Schedule D excepted service positions appointed under 5 CFR §213.3402(a)), Pathways Programs.
Law Clerk positions are filled by HR Centers in accordance with the excepted service hiring procedures outlined in 5 CFR Part 302, and HHS Instruction 302-1, Employment in the Excepted Service.
Legal Intern NTE (Temporary) positions are filled by HR Centers in accordance with 5 CFR Part 362, and HHS Instruction 362-1, Pathways Programs.
Attorney positions are exempt from the excepted service hiring procedures under 5 CFR Part 302; but are not exempt from the merit system principles (5 U.S.C. §2301) or the regulatory requirements under 5 CFR §302.101(c):
Recruitment. (5 U.S.C. §2301 and Uniform Guidelines on Employee Selection Procedures ). Recruitment methods must be used that attract a qualified applicant pool and notify potential applicants of Attorney vacancies to ensure fair and open competition. Notification options include, but are not limited to, notice on the HHS or division’s website; notices provided at job fairs; third party recruitment boards; or a traditional job opportunity announcement (JOA). Strategic outreach that includes legal- related publications and organizations may also be considered. Job notices must include information on the vacant position including salary; duties; geographic location; qualification requirements; and information on how to apply. HR Centers must establish written procedures for recruiting and assessing Attorney positions and apply these procedures uniformly to all applicants.
Veterans’ Preference.
Veteran’s preference is required to be applied as far as administratively feasible when filling Attorney positions (5 CFR §302.101(c)), i.e. military service is a positive factor when assessing Attorney candidates. Applicant lists will annotate which applicants are veterans. (For definition of administratively feasible, see OPM Vet Guide, Veterans’ Preference in Appointments, Excepted Service Employment.)
When a non-preference eligible applicant is selected over a preference eligible applicant, the pass over procedures under 5 U.S.C. §3318 are not required to be followed for Attorney positions (Jarrad vs. DOJ, 669 F.3d 1320 (9th Cir. 2012)).
Qualified Attorney applicants who are preference eligibles must be provided the reason(s) for non-selection upon request, as required by 5 CFR §302.101(c).
HHS Priority Reemployment List (PRL). Selection priority is required by regulation to be provided to former HHS excepted service employees who are registered on HHS Priority Reemployment List (PRL) before referring the names of other qualified Attorney candidates, in accordance with 5 CFR §302.101(c) and HHS Instruction 330-2, Priority Placement Programs. Sufficient documentation must be retained to demonstrate PRL clearance for each vacancy.

HR Centers do not need to provide selection priority to displaced or surplus candidates under the Career Transitions Assistance Plan (CTAP), Interagency Career Transition Assistance Plan (ICTAP) or the Reemployment Priority List (RPL) before making Attorney appointments (5 CFR §§ 330.211(i) (RPL), 330.609(i) (CTAP), and 330.707(g) (ICTAP)). Note: the PRL and the RPL are two different lists. PRL covers excepted service positions and the RPL covers competitive service positions.
When processing personnel actions, OPM’s Guide to Processing Personnel Actions, Chapter 11, Excepted Service Appointments, is used, citing the specific Schedule A or Schedule D authority that authorizes the appointment.
Tenure is assigned following guidance in OPM’s Guide to Data Standards. Generally, time-limited appointments are Tenure Code 3; individuals serving trial periods are assigned Tenure Code 2; and employees who have completed trial periods and are on permanent appointments are Tenure Code 1.
I. Trial Periods
HHS excepted service employees serve a two (2) year trial period. Rules on initial trial periods; supervisor and manager trial periods; creditable time; failure to complete a trial period; and performance based and adverse actions taken during trial periods are covered in HHS Instruction 315-1 Probationary and Trial Periods.

J. Other Actions
Details are made in accordance with the rules under 5 CFR §300.301  and HHS Instruction 300-3, Details and IPA Assignments.
Employees reassigned to another position without promotion or change to a lower grade must meet the qualification requirements for the position (series/grade level). Consult the HHS Instruction 362-1, Pathways Programs for additional reassignment rules for Legal Interns.
Promotions (5 U.S.C. §§2301 and 2302).
The merit system principles apply to promotion/advancement within the excepted service; therefore, the employee must compete/have competed for the proposed position/grade level(s).
Promotions within the excepted service are not subject to the time-in-grade restrictions outlined in 5 CFR Part 300, Subpart F ; however, employees must meet the qualification requirements for the position (series and grade).
Time-in-grade restrictions outlined in 5 CFR Part 300, Subpart F, apply to movement to or within the competitive service; therefore, while promotions within the excepted service are not subject to time-in-grade; promotions upon non-competitive conversion to the competitive service (i.e., Legal Interns covered by this guidance) are subject to time-in-grade restrictions.
The time-limits for temporary, time-limited, intermittent, and seasonal Attorney appointments are described under 5 CFR §213.104. (Appointment time-limits for Law Clerks and Legal Interns are covered in this guidance under Section E., Definitions.)
K. Adverse Actions and Appeals
Excepted service employees who meet the definition of ‘employee’ under 5 U.S.C. § 7511(a) (1)(B-C) generally have appeal rights to the Merit Systems Protection Board for adverse actions.
Servicing Employee Relations staff should be consulted when dealing with unacceptable performance and/or employee misconduct to ensure actions are in compliance with law, regulations, HHS policy, and applicable collective bargaining agreement(s).
Individuals entitled to priority consideration who are preference eligibles, or suffered compensable injury, have appeal rights to the MSPB if they believe their reemployment rights were violated (5 CFR §§302.101(c); 302.103; and 302.501).
L. Documentation and Accountability
Records associated with personnel actions, including all documentation sufficient for third party reconstruction purposes, must be retained according to the record disposition schedule. Generally, all records created in a given year must be retained for a total of three (3) full years. Records involved in litigation and grievance processes may be destroyed only after official notification is received from OPM, Department of Justice, Courts, the Office of General Counsel etc. that the matter has been fully litigated, or resolved, and closed.
ASA OHR may conduct periodic accountability reviews to analyze compliance with this guidance, HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
M. Guidance Information
Owned by: Office of Human Resources, Policy and Accountability Division (PAD)
Effective date: November 1, 2016, Rev 06/17/2022
Contact Information: employmentpolicy@hhs.gov


























HHS OHR Guidance, Schedule A Persons with Disabilities

A. Purpose
This guidance is provided to establish procedures and clarify regulatory requirements for the employment of persons with disabilities under Schedule A in the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS).  This guidance is used in conjunction with HHS Instruction 302- 1, Employment in the Excepted Service, which covers these positions.

When provisions of this guidance differ from changes in applicable law or regulation, the changes in law or regulation apply.

B. Coverage
This guidance covers only Schedule A positions filled under the excepted service authority, 5 CFR §213.3102(u), regarding persons with intellectual disabilities, severe physical disabilities, or psychiatric disabilities (hereinafter “Persons with Disabilities” or ‘Schedule A’). The authority must be cited when filling positions.

C. References
5 U.S.C. §3320, Excepted Service; selection 
29 U.S.C. §701, et seq., The Rehabilitation Act of 1973 
42 U.S.C. §12101, et seq., The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended 
42 U.S.C. §12102, Definition of Disability 
5 CFR Part 3, Noncompetitive Acquisition of Status
5 CFR Part 211, Veterans Preference
5 CFR §213.104, Special provisions for temporary, time-limited, intermittent, or seasonal appointments in Schedule A, B, C, or D
5 CFR §213.3102(u), Schedule A Hiring Authority for appointment of persons with intellectual disabilities, severe physical disabilities, or psychiatric disabilities
5 CFR Part 302.101(c), Positions Exempt from Appointment Procedures
5 CFR §315.709, Appointment for Persons with Disabilities
EEOC Notice, No. 915.002, EEOC Enforcement Guidance: Disability-Related Inquiries and Medical Examinations of Employees Under the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), July 27, 2000
HHS Instruction 330-2, Priority Placement Programs (CTAP, ICTAP, RPL, PRL)
OPM Vet Guide, Veterans’ Preference in Appointments, Excepted Service Employment (for definition of administratively feasible)
OPM Standard Form (SF) 256, Self-Identification of Disability Form - PDF
Uniform Guidelines on Employee Selection Procedures 
D. Responsibilities
HHS Assistant Secretary for Administration, Office of Human Resources (OHR):
Develops Department-wide human resources guidance and policy consistent with HHS and OPM policy, procedures and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Periodically reviews Operating Division and Staff Division (OpDiv/StaffDiv) procedures, actions, and reports to assure conformance with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
OpDiv and StaffDiv Human Resources Offices (HROs):
Comply with this guidance, HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations when making appointments under the Schedule A authority.
Establish recruitment methods for persons with disabilities, ensuring the hiring procedures described in this guidance are applied uniformly, in accordance with the merit system principles, the principle of veterans’ preference, and the priority consideration requirements under 5 CFR §302.101(c).
Adhere to the time-limits for temporary and time-limited appointments under 5 CFR §213.104.
E. Procedures
Verifying Proof of Disability Prior to Appointment
In general, the American with Disabilities Act (ADA) does not allow an employer to ask questions about a disability until after the employer makes a conditional job offer; however, an employer may invite applicants to voluntarily self-identify as a person with a disability. Applicants who identify themselves as ‘Schedule A’ when applying to federal positions are self-identifying themselves as an individual with a disability, in accordance with the USAJOBS’ hiring paths.
To be eligible for an appointment under this Schedule A authority, the applicant must have a disability that meets the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (“Rehab Act”) definition of a disability and must submit proof of their disability prior to appointment. The Self-Identification of Disability Form, OPM Standard Form (SF) 256, lists disabilities that meet the Rehab Act’s definition of a disability; however, this list is not exhaustive and an individual may be eligible for an appointment even though he/she has a disability that is not on the SF-256 list, if he/she meets the requirements of 5 CFR §213.3102(u).
Prior to making a tentative job offer, the OpDiv/StaffDiv (e.g., Special Placement Program Coordinator (SPPC), servicing HR Specialist, etc.) must verify the authenticity of medical documentation from a medical professional described in 5 CFR §213.3102(u)(3)(ii) by contacting the medical professional. Contact information should be verified/obtained independently (via online, telephone directory, etc.) to ensure the request is received by the medical professional listed on the documentation. The medical provider’s confirmation that the proof of disability provided by the applicant is authentic must be in writing and documented in the case file.
 
Recommended Language:

[Name of doctor/medical professional]:

[Applicant Name] has applied for a position at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services under a hiring authority for persons with intellectual disabilities, severe physical disabilities, or psychiatric disabilities. [Mr./Ms. Applicant’s Name] has provided the [enclosed or attached] medical documentation from you/your office dated [date] that states [he/she] has the following disability/medical condition:

[Disability/medical condition listed on medical documentation provided by applicant]

We ask your cooperation in verifying the [enclosed or attached] medical documentation your patient provided in his/her employment application was completed and/or authorized by you/your office. Please DO NOT submit a copy of the patient’s medical records.

Please reply to this [letter/email] so I can confirm that [Mr./Ms. Applicant’s Name] is eligible for appointment to a federal position under the hiring authority for persons with disabilities.

Thank you,

Documentation from an agency that issues or provides disability benefits, as described under 5 CFR §213.3102(u)(3)(ii), may be accepted without further confirmation, if the documentation is official (i.e., on letterhead, signed and dated by the agency, and certifies the applicant is receiving benefits due to a disability). If this proof is not provided by the applicant, then the documentation must be verified following the procedures in Section E.1(c) above.
Per the SF-256, employees hired via this Schedule A authority are required to complete the SF-256. If the employee declines to identify his/her disability on the form, their disability code is obtained from the medical documentation that was used to support their appointment.
F. Filling Positions
Hiring Process. Persons with disabilities may be hired via the:
Competitive process – Persons with disabilities may apply under the traditional competitive hiring process and be considered for federal positions in the same manner as applicants without disabilities, then be appointed via the hiring authority for the position for which they applied;
Veterans appointments – Veterans with disabilities may also be considered and appointed via the Veterans Recruitment Appointment (VRA); 30% or More Disabled Veterans Program; or Veterans Employment Opportunity Act (VEOA) special hiring authorities; or
Non-competitive Schedule A hiring process – Persons with disabilities can apply for jobs under Schedule A.  They are not required to compete with non-Schedule A applicants; but they are required to compete with other Schedule A, Persons with Disabilities, applicants who apply for the vacancy.  Schedule A applicants are assessed and appointed via Schedule A, 5 CFR §213.3102(u), following the hiring procedures in F. 2. below.
Recruitment, Assessment, and Selection Procedures.  5 CFR §302.101(c) exempts this Schedule A authority from the excepted service hiring procedures; however, hiring procedures are required to adhere to the merit system principles, and the veterans’ preference and priority consideration requirements under 5 CFR §302.101(c):
Recruitment. Consistent with the merit system principles, OpDiv/StaffDivs must use recruitment methods that notify potential applicants of vacancies within HHS so interested applicants have a reasonable opportunity to apply.  Notification options, include, but are not limited to, notice on the HHS or division’s website of existing or future vacancies; notices provided at job fairs; or a traditional job opportunity announcement (JOA).  Strategic outreach that includes disability-related publications and organizations may also be considered. OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Centers must establish procedures on their recruitment methods and assessment procedures, and apply them uniformly to all applicants.
Qualification Requirements.  Schedule A applicants must meet the OPM qualification requirements for the position (series/grade) they are selected.
Veterans’ Preference, 5 CFR §302.101(c) and OPM Vet Guide, Veterans’ Preference in Appointments, Excepted Service Employment.  When considering more than one (1) Schedule A applicant and one (1) or more applicant is a preference eligible, HR Centers:
Must apply veteran’s preference as far as administratively feasible, i.e. military service is a positive factor when assessing candidates.  Applicant lists will annotate which applicants are veterans.
Must provide preference eligible applicants the reason(s) for non-selection upon request.
When a non-preference eligible applicant is selected over a preference eligible applicant, the pass over procedures under 5 U.S.C. 3318 are not required to be followed (Jarrad vs DOJ, 669 F.3d 1320 (9th Cir. 2012); however HR Centers should document the reasons for non-selection.
HHS Priority Reemployment List (PRL), 5 CFR §302.101(c) and HHS Instruction 330-2, Priority Placement Programs.  Selection priority must be provided to former HHS excepted service employees who are registered on HHS Priority Reemployment List (PRL) before referring the names of other qualified candidates.  Sufficient documentation must be retained to demonstrate PRL clearance for each vacancy.

OpDivs/StaffDivs do not need to provide selection priority to displaced or surplus candidates under the Career Transition Assistance Plan (CTAP), Interagency Career Transition Assistance Plan (ICTAP) or the Reemployment Priority List (RPL) before making a Schedule A, Persons with Disabilities, appointment (5 CFR §§ 330.211(i); 330.609(i); and 330.707(g)).
G. Promotions
Employees may be promoted within the excepted service under the following conditions:
Promotions within the excepted service are not subject to the time-in-grade restrictions outlined in 5 CFR Part 300, Subpart F; however, excepted service employees must meet the qualification requirements for the position. OpDivs/StaffDivs will waive the qualifications specified under 5 CFR §302.403 for preference eligibles.
The merit system principles apply to promotions within the excepted service; therefore, the employee must compete/have competed for the proposed position/grade level, otherwise the action is a prohibited personnel practice (5 U.S.C. §§2301 and 2302).
Schedule A, Persons with Disabilities, employees may be promoted upon conversion to the competitive service under the following conditions:
If the employee is in an excepted service position with a career ladder and the employee competed for the proposed position/grade level, and
The employee meets the qualification requirements for the competitive service position at the time of conversion, then promotion upon conversion is allowed as follows:
The promotion action is processed first, while the employee is a Schedule A employee, then
The non-competitive conversion to the competitive service is processed as the second personnel action.
Promotions After Conversion. Competitive service rules, including time-in-grade, apply.
H. Conversions
Employees on a temporary Schedule A, Persons with Disabilities, appointment are not eligible for non-competitive conversion to the competitive service.  Time served in a temporary appointment under 5 CFR § 213.3102(u) does not count toward the two (2) year service requirement for non- competitive conversion (5 CFR §§ 213.3102(u)(6)(ii) and 315.709(a)(1)).
An employee on a permanent or time-limited (i.e., with a NTE date) appointment may be non- competitively converted to a career or career-conditional appointment in the competitive service if the employee meets the following requirements (5 CFR Part 3; 5 CFR §§ 213.3102(u)(6) and 315.709):
Completes two (2) or more years of satisfactory service, without a break of more than 30 days, on a non-temporary appointment under 5 CFR §213.3102(u);
Is recommended for conversion by his or her supervisor;
Meets all requirements and conditions governing career and career-conditional appointment, except those requirements concerning competitive selection from a register and medical qualifications; and
Is converted without a break in service of one (1) workday.
I. Adverse Actions and Appeals
Excepted service employees who meet the definition of ‘employee’ under 5 U.S.C. § 7511(a)(1)(B-C) generally have appeal rights to the Merit Systems Protection Board for adverse actions.
Servicing Employee Relations staff should be consulted when dealing with unacceptable performance and/or employee misconduct to ensure actions are in compliance with law, regulations, HHS policy, and applicable collective bargaining agreement(s).
Individuals entitled to priority consideration who are preference eligibles, or suffered compensable injury, have appeal rights to the MSPB if they believe their reemployment rights were violated (5 CFR §§302.101(c); 302.103; and 302.501).
J. Documentation and Accountability
Records associated with personnel actions, including all documentation sufficient for third party reconstruction purposes, must be retained according to the record disposition schedule. Generally, all records created in a given year must be retained for a total of three (3) full years.  Records involved in litigation and grievance processes may be destroyed only after official notification is received from OPM, Department of Justice, courts, the Office of the General Counsel etc. that the matter has been fully litigated, or resolved, and closed.
HHS OHR will conduct periodic accountability reviews to analyze compliance with this guidance, HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
K. Guidance Information
Owned by: Office of Human Resources, Policy and Accountability Division (PAD)
Effective date: 06/15/2020, Rev 10/30/2020
Contact Information: employmentpolicy@hhs.gov





















OHR Guidance Post-Secondary Students and College Graduates

A.  Purpose.

This guidance establishes hiring procedures and reporting requirements for two (2) new competitive service hiring authorities for 1) Post-Secondary Students and 2) College graduates.  These hiring authorities are not part of the Pathways Programs.  The 2019 National Defense Authorization Act established them, which required the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) to revise regulations to allow certain positions to be filled.  

When this guidance differs from changes in applicable law or regulation, the changes in law or regulation apply.

B.  Coverage.

This guidance covers time-limited appointments via the Post-Secondary Student hiring authority  (5 CFR 316, Subpart I) and permanent appointments via the College Graduate hiring authority (5 CFR §315.614) at the GS-11 grade level (or equivalent) and below.  The specific competitive service authority must be cited in personnel actions when filling positions.

The provisions of this guidance pertaining to conditions of employment of bargaining unit employees are fully negotiable in accordance with 5 U.S.C. Chapter 71. When the provisions of this guidance differ from the requirements contained in applicable collective bargaining agreement(s), the agreement takes precedence for covered bargaining unit employees.

C.  References.

Public Law (P.L.) 115-232, National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) for the Fiscal Year 2019, Section 1108
P.L. 116-92, NDAA for the Fiscal Year 2020 (modified part of 5 U.S.C. §3116)
5 United States Code (U.S.C.) §3115, Expedited Hiring Authority for College Graduates; competitive service
5 U.S.C. §3116, Expedited Hiring Authority for Post-Secondary Students; competitive service
5 U.S.C. §3327, Civil Service Employment Information 
5 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) §315.614, College Graduates
5 CFR 316, Subpart I, Post-Secondary Students
5 CFR 330, Subpart B, Reemployment Priority List
D.  Responsibilities.

HHS Assistant Secretary for Administration, Office of Human Resources (ASA/OHR):
Develops Department-wide human resources guidance on Post-Secondary Student and College Graduate hiring authorities consistent with HHS and OPM policy, procedures, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Submits annual reports to OPM and Congress NLT [TBA in final regulations].
Periodically reviews Operating Division and Staff Division (OpDiv/StaffDiv) procedures, actions, and reports to analyze compliance with this guidance and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
OpDiv and StaffDiv Human Resources Centers (HR Centers):
Comply with this guidance and applicable federal laws and regulations when filling positions under these authorities.
Calculate their Division’s annual hiring limits at the beginning of each fiscal year following the instructions in this guidance.
Submit a report NLT [TBA in final regulations] to ASA/OHR containing the data and information listed under Section I. of this guidance.
Maintain individual recruitment case files to allow for third-party reconstruction and to fulfill reporting requirements described in this guidance in a timely manner.
E.  Hiring Limits (5 CFR §§315.614(i) and 316.913)

READ CAREFULLY.  Each fiscal year, OpDivs/StaffDivs cannot exceed the hiring limits in the regulations cited above and described below: 
Post-Secondary Student Authority:  The annual hire limit is 15% of the total number of student appointments to positions at the GS-11 level or below made by OpDiv/StaffDiv during the previous fiscal year.

Student appointments made via the Pathways Intern (5 CFR §213.3402(a)) and Post-Secondary Student (5 CFR 316, Subpart I) hiring authorities may be used to calculate the annual hiring limit.

Appointments made via direct hire excepted service (except for the Pathways Intern Program), non-competitive authorities, or merit promotion cannot be used to calculate the Post-Secondary Student hiring limit. 
College Graduate Authority:  The annual hire limit is 15% of the total number of persons appointed by the OpDiv/StaffDiv during the previous fiscal year to positions classified in OPM’s administrative and professional occupational series (as defined in OPM’s Introduction to Position Classification Standards - PDF and their Handbook to Occupational Groups and Families - PDF), at the GS-11 level or below, via delegated examining procedures. 

Appointments made via direct hire excepted service or merit promotion authorities cannot be used to calculate annual College Graduate hiring limits.
After calculating 15% of the total number of hires made during the previous fiscal year, round up or down to the nearest whole number; i.e., values ending in .5 or more are rounded up to the nearest whole number, and values ending in less than .5 are rounded down to the nearest whole number.
OPM has the discretion to set a lower agency hiring limit during a fiscal year.  
F.  Recruitment Methods (5 U.S.C. §3327 ; 5 CFR §§315.614(e) and 316.905).

Vacancies must be advertised to the public; however, announcing via USAJOBS is not required.  USAJOBS may satisfy the public notification requirements of 5 U.S.C. §3327. Per OPM, their final regulations may exclusively require a USAJOBS posting to satisfy the requirement under 5 U.S.C. §3327 to notify OPM of competitive service vacancies (read thru line 112).

Suppose USAJOBS is not for advertising the vacancy. In that case, the job must be advertised on HHS.gov/Careers, OpDiv/StaffDiv’s public-facing home page, or at a minimum, a link to the job announcement on the employing agency’s public-facing home page.  OpDivs/StaffDivs may additionally advertise on third-party recruitment boards as long as the agency’s public-facing home page includes a link to a specific announcement.

Additionally, suppose USAJOBS is not for advertising time for the vacancy. In that case, HR Centers must provide OPM the link(s) to the public notice(s) used to solicit applicants when the links are posted, per OPM’s interim regulations.  This guidance will be updated after OPM issues final regulations and/or supplemental guidance.  HR Centers must retain sufficient documentation to provide links at a later date, if necessary, to support any hires made on/after the authority effective dates listed in this guidance.

Recruitment methods must meet the following requirements:

Provide a diverse and qualified candidate pool;
Potential applicants have information relevant to the vacancy being filled; and
Adhere to the merit system principles (5 U.S.C. §2301).
Job announcement must include:
Position title/series/grade;
Minimum qualification requirements;
Geographic location of position;
Position salary;
Eligibility for promotion/Career ladder;
For Post-Secondary students: 
If the position is temporary or term appointment;
For terms, if the appointment may be extended up to the 4-year limit (appointment extensions are not allowed without this language); and
Potential for conversion to the OpDiv/StaffDiv’s permanent workforce.
Workplace flexibilities (e.g., telework, remote work, student loan repayments); and
Information on how to apply.
CTAP and ICTAP do not apply when filling positions (5 CFR 330, Subparts F and G, Exceptions to Placement/Selection Priority); however, the HHS RPL must be cleared prior to filling positions (5 CFR 330, Subpart B).  See HHS Instruction 330-2, Priority Placement Programs, for information on the RPL.
G.  Post-Secondary Student Hiring Authority (5 U.S.C. §3116 and 5 CFR 316, Subpart I)

Authority.  Beginning on 09/17/2021, HR Centers may recruit and fill time-limited competitive service positions at the GS-11 level or below without regard to any rule under 5 U.S.C. §§3309-3319 or 3330:
Temporary appointments (for initial period NTE 1 year); or
Term appointments (for an initial period expected to last more than one year but less than 4).
Initial appointments can be extended for a period that will allow the student to complete his/her degree requirements, provided the extension does not exceed the time limits in 5 CFR Part 316; the eligibility criteria (G.4.) for the appointment continues to be met, andthe job announcement included extension language described in F.4. above.
Appointments are subject to the time limits described in 5 CFR Part 316 unless OPM approves an exception for individual cases.   
Classification (5 CFR §316.904).  Positions must be classified under the General Schedule to the xx99 series of the occupational group of the position.  Positions filled under the Federal Wage System must be classified to the xx01 series of the occupational group of the position.
Recruitment.  See Section F., Recruitment Methods. 
Eligibility Requirement (5 CFR §316.902).  Must be a student, i.e., enrolled or accepted for an institution of higher education and pursuing a baccalaureate or graduate degree on at least a part-time basis as determined by the institute of higher education (defined at 20 U.S.C. §1001).  
Qualification Requirements (5 CFR §316.903).  Candidates do not need to be rated/ranked but must meet OPM’s qualification requirements for the position (series/grade) being filled. 
Veterans’ preference does not apply when filling positions using this hiring authority; however, the number of veteran appointees must be reported annually (see Section I).
Promotion (5 CFR §316.909). 
Initial appointment of more than one year:  Employees are eligible if the individual meets the qualification requirements for the higher grade; the time in grade requirements (5 CFR 300, Subpart F); and the job announcement from which the employee was selected included a career ladder for the proposed grade level(s). 
Initial appointment less than one year:  Employees are not eligible for the promotion. 
Breaks in Program (5 CFR §316.908).  OpDivs/StaffDivs may approve or deny a post-secondary employee’s request for a break in the program (i.e., a period of time when an employee is working but unable to go to school or is neither attending class nor working at HHS).  HR Centers establish internal procedures for employees to submit written requests and apply them uniformly to all employees appointed under this authority.
Conversion (5 CFR 315, Subpart G, and §316.910).  Employees may be converted to a permanent appointment in the competitive service within their employing OpDiv/StaffDiv, without further competition when the student has completed a baccalaureate or graduate degree andmeets the OPM qualification requirements for the permanent position.
Termination (5 CFR §316.912).  Employees are terminated upon the NTE date of the post-secondary student appointment unless the employee is converted to a permanent position in the competitive service, or the HR Center extends the appointment prior to expiration.  See G.1. above for appointment time limits.
Tenure (5 CFR §§316.907 and 316.911). 
Employees whose initial appointment is NTE 1 year are Tenure Group 0.
Employees whose initial appointment is expected to last more than one year are Tenure Group III.
Employees become a career or career-conditional employee only upon completion of the student’s academic requirements and non-competitive conversion to a permanent position unless the employee has already satisfied the requirements for career tenure in a previous position or is exempt from the service requirements in 5 CFR §315.201.
Acquisition of Competitive Status (5 CFR §§315.201(b)(1)(xvii) and 316.906).  Employees acquire competitive status after non-competitive conversion to a permanent appointment and upon completion of an initial probationary period.  See HHS Instruction 315-1, Probationary and Trial Periods.
H.  College Graduate Hiring Authority (5 U.S.C. §3115 and 5 CFR §315.614)

Authority.  Beginning on December 6, 2021, HR Centers may recruit and fill permanent competitive service positions classified in OPM’s administrative and professional occupational series at the GS-11 level or below, including positions with promotion potential above the GS-11 level, without regard to any rule under 5 U.S.C. §§3309-3319 or 3330.  
Classification (5 CFR §315.614(d)).  HR Centers may fill positions under this authority that are classified in OPM’s administrative and professional series, as defined in OPM’s Introduction to Position Classification Standards - PDF and their Handbook to Occupational Groups and Families - PDF.
Recruitment.  See Section F., Recruitment Methods. 
Eligibility Requirement (5 CFR §315.614(b)).  Must have completed a bachelor’s or advanced degree within two (2) years of applying for employment (i.e., the date submitted is the date received by the employing OpDiv/StaffDiv).  The two (2) year eligibility begins on the date the degree is received, not the graduation ceremony date.  The degree must be from an institution of higher education defined at 20 U.S.C. §1001.  For applicants who have completed a degree and served at least four years in the uniformed services, the 2-year eligibility period begins on the date of the applicant’s discharge or release from the uniformed service.  
Qualification Requirements (5 CFR §315.614(c)).  Candidates do not need to be rated/ranked but must meet OPM’s qualification requirements for the position (series/grade) being filled. 
Veterans’ preference does not apply when filling positions using this hiring authority; however, the number of veteran appointees must be reported annually (see Section I).
Promotion.  Employees are eligible for the promotion if the individual meets the qualification requirements for the higher grade;the time in grade requirements (5 CFR 300, Subpart F); and the job announcement from which the employee was selected include a career ladder for the proposed grade level(s). 
Tenure (5 CFR §§315.201 and 315.614(h)).  Employees are Tenure Group I or II. 
Acquisition of Competitive Status (5 CFR §315.614(g)).  Employees acquire competitive status upon their completion of an initial probationary period.  See HHS Instruction 315-1, Probationary and Trial Periods.
I.  Annual Reports (5 CFR §315.614(j) and §316.914).  When final regulations are released, OPM will issue written guidance on collecting the following information and reporting due date(s).

ASA/OHR must submit an HHS annual report to OPM and Congress NLT [TBA].   
HR Centers are required to submit a report NLT [TBA] to ASA/OHR and include the following information (for each hiring authority):
OpDiv/StaffDiv fiscal year’s numerical hiring limit;
Number of appointments by title, series, grade, and geographic location;
Number of veterans appointed, as defined in 5 U.S.C. §2108;
Number of individuals appointed who are minorities or members of other underrepresented groups identified in 5 U.S.C. §3115, 5 U.S.C. §3116, and OPM guidance;
(For College Graduate hiring authority only) Number of appointments to a position classified in a professional or administrative occupational series at GS-11 or below;
Recruitment sources, outreach, and recruitment activities used to fill positions;
Number of separations (including reasons for separation); and
Information on difficulties using either of these hiring authorities;
ASA/OHR will send an annual data call reminding HR Centers of this reporting requirement.
J.  Guidance Information. 

Owned by: ASA/Office of Human Resources, Policy and Accountability Division
Effective date: September 17, 2021 (Revised October 25, 2022)
Contact Information: employmentpolicy@hhs.gov




















HHS Office of Human Resources Guidance, Hiring Assessment Strategies

A.  Purpose.

This guidance is provided to establish procedures and clarify regulatory requirements under Executive Order (EO) 13932 and sets forth the policy for the use of hiring assessments in determining what applicants for competitive service positions within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) will be placed on the Certificate(s) of Eligibles. This process is known as the assessment process. To the extent that this policy guidance contradicts with other HHS policies, this policy should prevail.

On June 26, 2020, Executive Order 13932, Modernizing and Reforming the Assessment and Hiring of Federal Job Candidates was issued. The EO reminded agencies of their legal obligation to use valid, competency-based assessments and directed them to scale back reliance upon educational qualifications as a substitute for competencies in the Federal hiring process.
Specifically, the EO directed agencies to do the following:

Refrain from relying solely on candidate self-assessment of their qualifications (e.g., occupational questionnaires). Applicants are to clear other assessment hurdles in order to be considered qualified in examinations and thus eligible for preference and referral.
Continually evaluate the effectiveness of different assessment tools to ensure the quality and integrity of their hiring process.
The applicant assessment process used will vary, depending on the type of position being filled, the competencies identified for that position, the volume of applicants anticipated and the resources available (e.g., time, budget, and subject matter expertise). With these variables in mind, a multi-hurdle approach to an assessment process may not be a viable option for each position. When designing an assessment strategy, the use of a multi-hurdle approach must align with the hiring needs of each OpDiv/StaffDiv. For example, low volume hiring or entry level work may not require the use of a multiple hurdle approach.
Using effective assessment tools will reduce the degree of error in making hiring decisions. Well-developed assessment tools will allow HHS Operating and Staff Divisions (OpDivs/StaffDivs) to specifically target the competencies and skills they seek. This helps to ensure the time spent by both applicants and HHS personnel adds value to the decision- making process. Selection errors have financial and practical impacts on organizations. The consequences of even a single selection error can create problems for an entire work unit. Some selection errors can have Department-wide consequences such as customer service complaints, increases in work-related accidents and injuries, high absenteeism, poor work quality, increased turnover, or damage to the reputation of the Department.

B.  Coverage.

This guidance covers the requirements of Executive Order 13932 and applies to all vacancies in the competitive service, with the exception of competitive hiring actions that do not require competitive rating and ranking of candidates (e.g., when using a direct hire authority). It does not cover vacancies in the excepted service (e.g., Pathways, Schedule A hiring, etc.) or the Senior Executive Service.

When the provisions of a negotiated labor/management agreement differ from the provisions of this policy, the agreement takes precedence for those employees covered by the negotiated labor/management agreement.

C.  References.

5 C.F.R. § 300.103 - Basic Requirements
5 C.F.R. § 300.104 - Appeals, grievances and complaints
5 C.F.R. § 302 – Employment in the Excepted Service 
5 C.F.R. § 351.701 - Assignment involving displacement 
5 C.F.R. § 351.702 - Qualifications for assignment 
5 C.F.R. § 362.203(c) – Filing Positions 
5 C.F.R. § 362.303(d) – Filing Positions 
5 C.F.R. § 362.402(c) – Program Administration 
5 U.S.C. § 3318 - Competitive service, selection from certificates 
5 U.S.C. § 3301 - Civil service; generally 
5 U.S.C. § 3302 - Competitive service; rules 
5 U.S.C. §§ 3309, Preference eligibles; examinations; additional points for 
5 U.S.C. §§ 3319, Alternative Ranking and Selection Procedures 
5 U.S.C. § 2108 - Veteran; disabled veteran; preference eligible 
5 U.S.C. § 2108a - Treatment of certain individuals as veterans, disabled veterans, and preference  eligibles 
5 U.S.C. § 2302 - Prohibited personnel practices 
38 U.S.C. § 5303A - Minimum active-duty service requirement 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) Multipurpose Occupational System Analysis Inventory – Closed - PDFEnded - PDF(MOSIAC) Competencies, January 2013
Delegated Examining Operations Handbook - PDF
HHS Instruction 1104-1: Delegated Examining Operations, August 3, 2020
Executive Order 13932, Modernizing and Reforming the Assessment and Hiring of Federal Job Candidates HHS Instruction 1104-1 (August 3, 2020) and EO 13932 (June 26, 2020)
D.  Definitions.

Assessment: A valid, reliable, and systematic approach to gathering information about individuals. This information is used to make employment or career-related decisions about applicants and employees.
Assessment Tool/Hurdle: A device or method used to measure the degree to which an applicant possesses the competencies/KSAs necessary for successful job performance (i.e., occupational questionnaires, rating schedules, written tests, work samples, and structured interviews, etc.).
Category Rating: A method of evaluating candidates who meet eligibility and minimum qualification requirements for the position by assessing the applicants' experience, education, and training and placing them into pre-defined "quality categories" rather than assigning individual numerical scores.
Federal Anti-Discrimination Laws: Federal laws designed to protect workers from various forms of employment discrimination and harassment. These federal discrimination laws apply to all phases of employment, from the job listing and interview process to termination (i.e., Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964; Pregnancy Discrimination Act of 1978; Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967; Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended; Rehabilitation Act of 1973; Equal Pay Act of 1963; Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008.)
Industrial-Organizational (I/O) Psychologist: Credentialed expert that focus on the behavior of employees in the workplace, by applying psychological principles and research methods to improve the overall work environment for the organization.
Job Analysis: A systematic method for gathering, documenting, and analyzing information about the content, context, and requirements of the job. It demonstrates that there is a clear relationship between the tasks performed on the job and the competencies/KSAs required to perform the tasks. Job analysis information is used to develop employee selection procedures, identify training needs, define performance standards, and other uses.
Job Opportunity Announcement: A document that informs the public about a job vacancy in the federal service, describes the requirements of the job, and instructs applicants on how to apply for the vacancy.
Minimum Qualifications: Qualifications that an applicant must possess to be eligible to participate in an assessment for hire under the competitive system, e.g., education, experience, and/or other requirements (e.g., licensure). Applicants who do not meet the minimum qualification requirements for the position receive no further consideration.
Occupational Questionnaire: An assessment tool used to assess applicants’ qualifications and experience. Occupational questionnaires generally ask candidates to self-report their level of training and experience in carrying out critical tasks and demonstrating critical competencies identified through job analysis.
Preference Eligible: An individual who meets the definition of a “preference eligible” veteran, spouse, widow/widower, or parent.
Subject Matter Expert: A person with bona fide expert knowledge of the responsibilities, duties, day-to-day functions, competencies/knowledge, skills, and abilities (KSAs), and requirements of a position.
Subject Matter Expert-Qualifying Assessment (SME-QA): A subject matter expert participating in the process of developing/identifying effective assessment tools for utilization in the hiring process.
Talent Team: A team comprised of highly skilled individuals with a strong knowledgebase in Human Resource (HR) policies, practices, and operations.
USA Hire: An OPM ready-made, off-the-shelf, competency-based assessment tool that is available in the USAJOBS hiring platform and used to assess applicants during the hiring process.
Veteran’s Preference: A statutory right that entitles qualifying veterans to certain advantages in consideration for federal employment in the competitive and excepted services of the executive branch.
E.   Responsibilities

HHS Assistant Secretary for Administration, Office of Human Resources (ASA/OHR):
Develops Department-wide human resources (HR) guidance and policy consistent with HHS and OPM policy, procedures and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Periodically reviews (OpDiv/StaffDiv) recruitment activities to analyze compliance with this guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
OpDiv and StaffDiv Human Resources Centers (HR Centers):
Comply with this guidance, Executive Order 13932, and applicable federal laws and regulations.
Identify resources, if any, outside of current HR budgets to establish, as needed, talent teams that support multi-hurdle assessment for applicants as well as support internship improvements.
Create talent teams, as needed, to create a multi-level effort focused on improving hiring outcomes, both within OpDivs/StaffDivs and across HHS using multi-hurdle assessments.
Establish internal procedures to meet EO reporting requirements.
F.  Procedures.

Occupational questionnaires generally ask candidates to self-report their level of training and experience in carrying out critical tasks and demonstrating critical competencies identified through job analysis. In order to increase the quality of applicants for selection consideration, Executive Order 13932 mandates additional applicant assessment tools other than self-report occupational questionnaires. OpDivs/StaffDivs should use effective assessment tools in determining what candidates for a position will be placed on the Certificate of Eligibles for a position.

Choosing Effective Assessment Tools
Using effective assessment tools will reduce the degree of error in making hiring decisions. Well-developed assessment tools allow OpDivs/StaffDivs to specifically target the competencies and skills they seek. This helps to ensure the time spent by both applicants and agency personnel adds value to the decision-making process.

Any assessment tool must be reliable, valid, relevant and meet the following criteria:

Fair and practical – Assessment procedures must be practical and provide candidates a fair chance to have their job-related abilities evaluated.
Best qualified candidates – Assessment procedures should be successful in identifying a highly qualified, diverse pool of candidates who can perform successfully in the position.
Develop and use without discrimination. Candidates should not be discriminated against on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, disability, marital status, or political affiliation.
Provide candidates with the opportunity to appeal – A candidate may file a complaint with an agency when he or she believes that an employment practice that was applied to him or her and that is administered by the agency discriminates against him or her on the basis of race, color, religion, sex (including pregnancy and gender identity), national origin, age (as defined by the Age Discrimination in Employment  Act of 1967,  as amended), disability, and genetic information (including family medical history). See 5 CFR § 300.103  and 5 CFR § 300.104. 
The assessment tool used will vary depending on the type of position being filled, the competencies identified for that position, the volume of applicants anticipated and the resources available (e.g., time, budget, and subject matter expertise). Self-report questionnaires can still be used in conjunction with another assessment tool that measures job-related competencies, without relying solely on self-report ratings.

Establishment of Talent Teams
Creation of talent teams is vital to the success of multi-hurdle applicant assessment processes. OpDivs/StaffDivs may create talent teams consistent with their individual recruitment needs.

Creating talent teams supports OpDivs/StaffDivs and their teams with a multi-level effort, including initiatives such as improvements for applicants, hiring managers, and HR using new and existing best practices. Therefore, OpDivs/StaffDivs are encouraged to create talent teams and set aside funds for assessment tools.
The ideal talent team should consist of a combination of new and existing highly talented individuals with strong leadership skills and a working knowledge of HHS HR policy and their OpDiv/StaffDiv operational practices and internal procedures. This must include HR staff with measurement expertise or I/O psychologists to help facilitate and validate custom technical and behavioral assessments, based on job analysis results.
The duties and functions of the talent team may include the following:
Continuously use hiring selection outcome data to inform assessment strategy for critical positions posted to the public.
Help execute strategically identified hiring assessment pilots using existing or new approaches and flexibilities, SME-QA panels, structured interviews, USA Hire, etc.
Drive new strategies and adoption of successful practices, including pooled hiring actions, effective qualifying technical and behavioral assessments, and shared certificate platforms.
Identify and implement tools to automate segments of the assessment process.
Serve as the connection point with the Hiring Line of Business and other OpDiv/StaffDiv talent teams to share best practices, joint job announcements, and government-wide implementation challenges.
Continuously analyze results of actions to measure potential adverse impact, determine applicant perception of assessments used, and work with SMEs to collaborate on assessment materials (including doing retrospectives).
Put the applicant experience at the forefront, to ensure that OpDivs/StaffDivs can attract top talent by reducing overly burdensome hurdles and processes.
Development of Assessment Tools
If a talent team is utilized, it will be responsible for the development and implementation of multi- hurdle (two or more) assessment tools for the screening of candidates, prior to certificate placement and referral, during the assessment process. All assessment tools must consider the following factors: (1) reliability, (2) validity, (3) technology, (4) legal context, and (5) face validity/applicant reactions.

Reliability: Refers to consistency.
Reliability is important when deciding which assessment to use for a given purpose. The test manual or other documentation supporting the use of an assessment should report details of reliability and how it was computed.

Validity: Refers to the relationship between performance on the assessment and performance on the job. Validity is the most important issue to consider when deciding whether to use a particular assessment tool because an assessment that does not provide useful information about how an individual will perform on the job is of no value to the organization.
There are different types of validity evidence. Which type is most appropriate will depend on how the assessment method is used in making an employment decision. For example, if a work sample test is designed to mimic the actual tasks performed on the job, then a content validity approach may be needed to establish the content of the test matches in a convincing way the content of the job, as identified by a job analysis. If a personality test is intended to forecast the job success of applicants for a customer service position, then evidence of predictive validity may be needed to show scores on the personality test are related to subsequent performance on the job.

NOTE: In most assessment scenarios where an assessment tool or process is used to identify potential new hires for few positions (e.g., a dozen or fewer), a predictive

validity study would not be practical. In such cases, it is sufficient to ensure validity through:

Measuring only job-related competencies identified in a job analysis
Relying on types of assessment tools that demonstrate a strong track record of validity
Technology: Occupations that typically receive a large volume of applicants for vacancy announcements may benefit from using technology to narrow down the applicant pool, such as online screening of resumes or online biographical data (biodata) tests. Technology can also overcome distance challenges and enable OpDivs/StaffDivs to reach a larger population of applicants. However, because technology removes the human element from the assessment process, it is best used in situations that do not rely heavily on human intervention, such as collecting applications or conducting applicant screening.
Legal Context of Assessment: OpDivs/StaffDivs should ensure that any assessment procedure used to make an employment decision does not adversely affect any group of people with characteristics protected by federal anti-discrimination laws. Any assessment procedure must be shown to be job-related and valid for its intended purpose.
Face Validity/Applicant Reaction: The goal of assessment procedures is to measure competencies/knowledge, skills and abilities without alienating or causing undue stress to participating candidates. With this in mind, no less than two (2) assessment tools will be used to assess candidates’ qualifications for technical, professional, or nonprofessional positions (including initial applicant review). The duration of each assessment tool should not exceed one (1) hour. This is to ensure the perception of face validity and overall fairness of the assessment process by candidates.
Minimum Qualifications Versus Assessment Tools;
The purpose of minimum qualifications for a position is to determine who should be allowed (i.e., who is qualified) to participate in the hiring assessments used to determine who will be deemed eligible for placement into a position. For the assessment portion of the process, applicants are expected to achieve a pre-determined passing grade, in order to be rated and ranked for further employment consideration.

Screening applicants for minimum qualification requirements is not the same as assessing applicants on the competencies necessary to perform the job. Screening minimum qualifications on an occupational questionnaire is important, but a “deeper dive” is required, in order to address the actual competencies that have been rated as critical for the job; evaluate who is eligible to perform the particular duties and functions of the position (i.e., those who achieve a passing grade on the assessment); and assess applicants’ relative levels of qualification beyond the passing level. Therefore, applicants who satisfy minimum qualification requirements are not automatically entitled to a qualifying score of 70 or more points, out of 100, when a numerical rating procedure is used. Nor are they entitled to placement in a quality category when a category rating process is used.

Here is an example of a diagram reflecting a sample of the process:

Image
example of a diagram reflecting a sample of the process
For additional information on minimum qualifications and assessments in the GS Qualifications Operating Manual and the use of passing scores with additional examples, see Chapter 5 of the Delegated Examining Operations Handbook. - PDF

Applicant Assessment
A multi-hurdle assessment approach is the use of two or more assessments in the assessment process. The use of multiple assessment tools involve the administration of assessments in sequential steps. After each assessment, candidates’ scores that fall below a predetermined threshold are eliminated and should not proceed to the next steps.

If it meets the hiring need of OpDivs/StaffDivs, using a multi-hurdle approach to determine which applicants are qualified for the position and placed on the certificate of eligibles is an option. Applicants must first complete the first “hurdle” of the assessment process, typically an automated, self-report questionnaire or inexpensive online test. The HRS also participates in this first hurdle by reviewing applicant resumes to ensure that minimum qualification requirements are met. Applicants who pass the first hurdle, and thus meet the minimum qualification requirements, move on to the next, more-rigorous assessment tool. This strategy permits for better assessment tools to be used without depleting resources in the process and allows for the best qualified candidates to be considered for the position. Below are common examples of first, second and final hurdles OpDivs/StaffDivs may employ, if using up to three assessments to assess applicants, to determine which applicants will be placed on the Certificate of Eligibles.

Common first hurdles may include: Application and resume; occupational questionnaire; biodata; personality tests; verification.
Common second hurdles may include: Cognitive ability tests; job knowledge tests; situational judgement tests.
Common final hurdles may include: Assessment centers; written assessments; work samples; structured interviews.
Examples of approaches for multi-hurdle assessments are reflected below. NOTE: These examples of assessment tools, scores, or processes used are not meant to be prescriptive and could potentially vary in practice (e.g., using a different combination of assessment tools, using different cut-off scores for categories, etc.).

Example 1: Job Knowledge Test + Subject Matter Expert (SME) Panel Interview
applications in USAJOBS, applicants complete an automated, multiple- choice job knowledge test questionnaire. This test consists of 15-20 technical subject matter area questions developed by SMEs. Scores for candidates to be minimally qualified range from 70-100, depending on applicants’ responses to the questionnaire. Although a minimally qualifying score of 70 has been established in the USA Staffing system, SMEs have established a cut-off score of 85. All candidates with a score of 85 or above on the knowledge test will advance to the next assessment phase and participate in a structured interview with a SME panel (Appendix A sample). Scoring on the interview panel ranges from 70-100, however, the SME panel determines that a score of 90 or above is the cut- off required for applicants to move to the next hurdle. All candidates scoring a 90 or above on the interview are listed on the certificate of eligibles, with all preference-eligible candidates listed above non-veterans.

Example 2: Occupational Questionnaire + Writing Sample + SME Panel Interview
When submitting applications in USAJOBS, applicants complete a short multiple-choice, self-report questionnaire about their experience and expertise. Scores for minimally qualified candidates range from 70-100, depending on their responses to the questionnaire. According to SMEs, a cut-off score of 80 is required for applicants to progress to the next hurdle. All candidates with a score of 80 or above advance to the next assessment phase. These candidates are invited to submit a writing sample. Each writing sample is evaluated by SMEs using a structured scoring rubric to assess candidates’ technical writing skills (Appendix C and E samples). All candidates with a score of 85 or above advance to the next assessment phase and are invited to participate in a structured interview with a SME panel. Scoring on the interview ranges from 80-100. All candidates scoring an 80 or above on the interview are listed on the certificate of eligibles, with all preference eligible candidates listed above non-veterans.

Example 3: Occupational Questionnaire + SME Panel Interview
When submitting applications in USAJOBS, applicants complete a short multiple-choice, self-report questionnaire about their experience and expertise. Scores for minimally qualified candidates range from 70-100, depending on applicants’ responses to the questionnaire. Although the minimal score is 70, SMEs establish a cut-off score of 80 for the questionnaire. All candidates with a score of 80 or above advance to the next structured SME panel interview assessment phase. Scoring on the structured interview ranges from 70-100, however the SME panel determines that a score of 90 or above is the cut-off for candidates to be referred to the selecting official. All candidates scoring a 90 or above on the interview are listed on the certificate of eligibles and referred to the selecting official, with all preference eligibles listed above non-veterans.

Example 4: Occupational Questionnaire + SME Resume Review
When submitting their applications in USAJOBS, applicants complete a short multiple- choice, self-report questionnaire about their experience and expertise. Scores for minimally qualified candidates range from 70-100, depending on their responses to the questionnaire. All applicants whose self-ratings place them in the pre-determined cut-off score (i.e., 80 and above) are reviewed by the Human Resources Specialist (HRS) to confirm that eligibility and basic qualification requirements are met (including any minimum education requirements). All eligible and qualified candidates with a score of 80 or above

advance to the next SME resume assessment phase. The SME panel will independently conduct resume reviews using a pre-determined scoring matrix based on the competencies and task statements contained in the job analysis (Appendix B sample). A total of five competencies will be assessed, and scoring for each competency will range from 0-5, with 5 being the highest score, based on the information reflected in the resume. The SME panel determines the overall cut-off score that will be used for the resume review hurdle is 20 (highest possible score is 25). The panel convenes to discuss and tally the scores for each applicant. All candidates with a score of at least 20 or above are listed on the certificate of eligibles and referred to the selecting official, with all preference eligibles listed above non-veterans.

Low volume hiring or entry level work may not require the use of a multiple hurdle approach. The OPM’s Assessment and Selection website, section Designing an Assessment Strategy includes key areas of consideration and resources for designing an assessment strategy.

Manual and Automated Assessments
OpDivs/StaffDivs are permitted to use manual and/or automated assessments, supported by competency-based assessment tools, including job analysis. Manual assessments are administered outside of the staffing system and then candidate scores are input into the system manually. Automated assessments are administered to candidates directly via the staffing system. Listed below are examples of assessments that may be used by OpDivs/StaffDivs. Other assessments not listed may be used as well.

Examples of automated assessments include:

Multiple choice occupational questionnaires (e.g., self-report questionnaires)
Job knowledge test items (as incorporated into the automated questionnaire system)
Examples of manual assessments include:

Writing Assessments
Structured Interviews
Rating Schedules (crediting plans or benchmarks)
Structured SME Resume Reviews
For additional information on how to administer both manual and automated assessment types in USA Staffing, please contact your USA Staffing Account Manager.

Competency-based Assessments:

OPM describes a competency as “A measurable pattern of knowledge, skills, abilities, behaviors, and other characteristics that an individual needs to perform work roles or occupational functions successfully.” Competency assessments represent a whole-person approach to assessing individuals and tend to be either general or technical.

General competencies reflect the cognitive and social capabilities (e.g., problem solving, interpersonal skills) required for job performance in a variety of occupations.
Technical competencies are more specific as they are tailored to the knowledge and skill requirements necessary for a specific job.
OPM has conducted a number of occupational studies to identify competencies for many Federal occupations in the Multipurpose Occupational Systems Analysis - PDF Inventory - Close-Ended (MOSAIC) Competencies library. - PDF
HR Specialist (HRS), Hiring Managers (HM) and Subject Matter Expert (SME) Involvement
HR Specialists, Hiring Managers (HMs), and SMEs all play integral roles in the recruitment and hiring process. Each brings unique insights that are valuable to selecting the best candidates available. The information below highlight examples of the role HRSs, HMs, and SMEs may play in the assessment process. NOTE: Although each role is specifically identified for each process, where more than one party has been identified to participate in a particular process, the absence of one party does not necessarily prevent the assessment process from moving forward. Additionally, examples of other HRS, SME and HM role combinations not listed below may be incorporated into the recruitment process.

Ensure the position description is accurate and up to date (HRS and HM).
Participate in development of the job analysis to identify the most critical competencies for the position (HRS, HM, and SME).
Develop a recruitment strategy (HM and HRS).
Identify or develop assessment tools (HRS, HM, and SME).
Ensure the job opportunity announcement (JOA) accurately describes the job (HRS and HM).
Actively recruit for open positions (HRS, HM, and SME):
Hiring managers and SMEs can share job opportunity announcements with others and invite individuals to apply for positions.
Work with HR during the assessment process (i.e., minimum qualifications review of applicants and identification of assessment tools used to rate and rank candidates) (SME).
If the SME and the HRS do not agree on the rating of an applicant, the HRS makes the final determination of the rating and ranking of the applicant and determines whether the applicant is eligible to be placed on the certificate of eligibles. This is used as a best practice for OpDivs/StaffDivs.
Interview candidates (SME):
SMEs can participate in the development of assessment materials and/or panels as part of the assessment process for a variety of assessment methods, including structured interviews, question development, response benchmark development, and scoring rubrics.
Structured résumé review, including developing scoring benchmarks (HRS and SME).
Writing sample review, including designing writing prompts and developing scoring benchmarks (SME).
Technical questionnaire development, including response options and scoring rubrics (HM and SME).
Talent Team Disagreement
When OpDivs/StaffDivs use talent teams as part of the assessment process, to determine if an applicant should be placed on the certificate of eligibles during subsequent assessment hurdle(s) after the initial assessment hurdle, participants may differ in their evaluations of an applicant’s job-

related competencies. This could happen if multiple talent team participants disagree with each other’s assessment of an applicant, or if one or more talent team participants disagree with the HRS about the results of an applicant assessment that took place during the first assessment hurdle. In this situation, talent team participants should review the applicant’s response (e.g., in an interview, each participant would read aloud their notes of what the candidate said in their response – in many cases, there may be something that was misheard or misunderstood), then have a discussion about how each talent team participant determined their rating for the response. This process continues until talent team participants are close enough in their ratings to provide a consensus rating (e.g., no more than 1 point apart on a 5-point scale). This process helps to ensure that talent team participants are basing their assessment ratings of candidate’s responses on the same information using the same criteria. In the event of an applicant assessment impasse among talent team members, the final applicant assessment rating will be made by the HR Branch Chief responsible for servicing the OpDiv/StaffDiv filling the position. Because applicant assessment ratings determine if they receive a passing grade in the assessment hurdle, in order to receive further employment consideration, ensuring talent team participant consensus is a vital part of the process, when disagreements occur.

Veteran’s Preference
OpDivs/StaffDivs must follow applicable veterans’ preference rules and regulations in the assessment process. Veterans' preference applies after candidates meet minimum qualifications and achieve passing scores on each assessment tool employed. An individual who does not meet the minimum qualifications for a position is not eligible to participate in the assessment process and may not be placed on the certificate of eligibles. All applicants must complete the application process and all assessments tools highlighted in the announcement. An applicant cannot choose to not take an assessment and be deemed qualified or eligible for the position. An individual who does not achieve a passing score on each assessment tool employed may not be placed on the certificate of eligibles.

For most jobs, when using a category rating system, preference eligibles must be selected over non-preference eligibles, except when the position is in a Professional/Scientific series at the GS-9 level and above.

Job Opportunity Announcement (JOA)
OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Centers must include the basis for rating applicants in the JOA. This is listed in the “How You Will Be Evaluated” section of the JOA, and at a minimum, the description of the assessment process should include:

A general overview of the assessment process – this need not be exhaustive but should provide applicants an idea of what the process will entail and what types of assessments they will complete (e.g., writing sample, online questionnaire, USA Hire, etc.).
A list of the competencies to be assessed during the assessment process, including the competency titles and definitions identified during the job analysis and targeted in the assessment process. (See Appendix F for sample JOA reflecting competencies with definitions.)
Tracking Results
Regardless of the assessment tool(s) chosen as part of an OpDiv/StaffDiv assessment strategy, it is important to evaluate the results received from the assessments used. This ensures that any assessment used is consistently identifying the best candidates for positions. Additionally, evaluating assessment effectiveness is also required of agencies per Executive Order 13932.
OpDiv/StaffDivs may accomplish this in several ways, as reflected below. Please note that this list is not exhaustive.

Reviewing Hiring Manager Satisfaction Survey data to examine managers’ perceptions of the quality of candidates on certificates.
Reviewing Applicant Satisfaction Survey data to examine applicants’ perceptions of the fairness and job-relatedness of assessments used in the assessment process.
Reviewing Time to Hire data to evaluate the impact of the assessment process on timely hiring practices.
Tracking utilization of shared services assessment tools such as USA Hire to ensure optimization of available assessment options.
Reviewing Applicant Flow Data in order to identify barriers to recruiting a well-qualified and diverse candidate pool.
Seek feedback from the hiring manager after a vacancy is filled or if a certificate is returned without a selection
Track and review the performance of particular assessment tools in various hiring scenarios (e.g., how well are SME interview panels working for selecting for scientist positions, or how effectively are evaluations of writing samples in identifying candidates with writing skills)
Obtain feedback from SMEs involved in the assessment process.
Questions to be asked by OpDiv/StaffDiv HR representative, talent team members, etc. to hiring managers at the end of the hiring process may include:
General: Were assessment instructions easy to follow?
General: Did the assessment help in identifying talented candidates?
General: Did the assessment process make sense for the position being filled?
Scoring Rubrics (for interviews, writing samples, etc.): How well did scoring benchmarks match up to candidates’ responses?
Work Sample: How closely did the assessment match the work performed on the job?
By regularly obtaining feedback, evaluating the effectiveness of the assessment processes, and making adjustments, OpDivs/StaffDivs can ensure that their assessments contribute to success in hiring the best candidates.

Policy Impact
Non-competitive Actions: There is no change to how agencies effect non-competitive actions. Appointments to competitive service positions must be made from individuals who meet OPM qualifications, with limited exceptions. Agencies have the option to verify, through use of a passing grade assessment, that an individual has the right competencies to be successful in the position. The use of a multi-hurdle, passing grade assessment is optional.

Special Appointing Authorities: There is no change to how agencies use special appointing authorities. Appointments to competitive service positions must be made from individuals who meet OPM qualifications, with limited exceptions. Agencies must ensure selectees meet

the qualification requirements of the position by meeting the education and/or experience requirements described in the OPM General Schedule Qualification Standard for the occupation at the grade level of the position being filled; and through use of a passing grade assessment that indicates an individual has the needed KSAs/competencies to be successful in the position, if used. Additional assessment for rating and ranking purposes would depend on the requirements of the appointing authority used.

Suggested Best Practices
Below are practices that can assist HRSs, HMs and SMEs in the recruitment process. While incorporation of these practices is not required, and the list of practices is not exhaustive, use of these and other practices not listed, where appropriate, can help strengthen facilitation of the recruitment process.

Work with the hiring manager to decide how to involve SMEs before the job opportunity announcement is posted.
Ensure that HR provides oversight of SME involvement throughout the recruitment and hiring process of the OpDiv/StaffDiv serviced.
Note that the same non-hiring manager SME may be involved in multiple phases of the assessment process (e.g. reviewing resumes, rating and ranking applicants, participating in selection interviews). OpDivs/StaffDivs may issue alternate internal guidance.
Verify responses from applicant self-report questionnaires with resume.
Base some part of the assessment process on general competencies (e.g., interpersonal skills, teamwork, writing).
Provide a strong verification statement up front in the job opportunity announcement or the instructions of the self-report questionnaire. The exact wording can vary, but often a verification statement at the beginning of the questionnaire will inform candidates that 1) their responses to the questionnaire will be verified, and 2) that there will be consequences for falsification of their information (e.g., adjustment of their score on the questionnaire, removal from consideration for the position, etc.).
Place a reasonable limit on the number of pages of a résumé that will be reviewed as part of the initial qualification determination. This limit must be clearly explained in the job opportunity announcement (e.g., state in the job opportunity announcement, “Please limit your résumé to 5 pages. If more than 5 pages are submitted, only the first 5 pages will be reviewed to determine your qualifications.”).
Guidance Information
Owned by: ASA/Office of Human Resources, Policy and Accountability Division (PAD)
Effective date: 09/12/2022
Contact Information: employmentpolicy@hhs.gov

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OHR Guidance Volunteer Service

Purpose.
This guidance explains the legal and regulatory requirements for volunteer service at HHS. 
Coverage.
This guidance covers student volunteer service under 5 U.S.C. §3111 and 5 CFR Part 308, and Public Health Service volunteers under 42 U.S.C. §217b and 45 CFR Part 57. 
References.
5 United States Code (U.S.C.) §3111, Acceptance of Volunteer Service 
5 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 308, Volunteer Service
42 U.S.C. §217b, Volunteer Services 
45 CFR Part 57, Volunteer Services 
OPM Guide to Processing Personnel Actions, Chapter 33, Volunteer Service - PDF
Responsibilities.
HHS Assistant Secretary for Administration, Office of Human Resources (ASA/OHR):
Establishes Department-wide human resources guidance and policy consistent with HHS and OPM policy, procedures and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
May periodically review Operating Division and Staff Division (OpDiv/StaffDiv) volunteer records to analyze compliance with this guidance and applicable federal laws and regulations.
OpDiv and StaffDiv Human Resources Centers (HR Centers) must comply with this guidance and applicable federal laws and regulations.
Procedures.
Student Volunteer Service authorized by 5 U.S.C. §3111 and 5 CFR Part 308
Volunteer service is uncompensated service performed by a student, with permission of the educational institution at which the student is enrolled, to provide work experience related to the student’s academic program, and to provide opportunity to explore career options and develop personal and professional skills.  Student volunteer work may be performed during the school year and/or during summer or school vacation periods.  Volunteer service cannot be used to displace any employee or to staff a position which is a normal part of the OpDiv/StaffDiv’s workforce. 
A student is an individual enrolled not less than half-time in a high school, trade school, technical or vocational institute, junior college, college, university, or other accredited educational institution (5 U.S.C. §3111(a) and 5 CFR §308.101).
Volunteers must meet the definition of a student as defined immediately above (Section (E)(1)(b)) throughout the duration of their volunteer service, except during acceptable breaks in education as described in 5 CFR §308.101.
The OpDiv/StaffDiv must request the appropriate documentation (e.g., official transcripts) to verify students are enrolled in an educational institution at least half-time prior to their start date and periodically throughout their volunteer service.  Official documentation must be provided by the student at least every six (6) months of the academic school year to ensure continued compliance with the eligibility requirements described in (E)(1)(b) and (c) immediately above.
Volunteers must meet the federal minimum working age (5 CFR §308.102(a)).  Generally, the Federal Labor Standards Act (FLSA) sets 14 years old as the minimum age for employment and limits the number of hours worked by minors under the age of 16 (Department of Labor age requirements).  OpDivs/StaffDivs should consult their servicing labor/employee relations staff with any questions or when considering a student less than 16 years of age for volunteer service. 
Volunteers are not federal employees for any purpose other than injury compensation; Federal Tort Claims Act coverage; and programs to encourage commuting via other than single occupancy vehicles such as transit benefits (5 U.S.C. §3111(c)(1)). 
Volunteer service is not creditable for leave or any other federal employee benefits.    
Volunteers can receive recognition through letters of appreciation or commendation but are not eligible for incentive awards (5 U.S.C. Chapter 45). 
Public Health Service Volunteers authorized by 42 U.S.C. §217b and 45 CFR Part 57
Public Health Service (PHS).  A division of HHS focused on protecting, promoting, and advancing public health and safety. The Assistant Secretary of Health (OASH) overseas the PHS, including the Commissioned Corps (not covered by this Instruction/authority). Ten (10) HHS Operating Divisions/Staff Divisions (OpDivs/StaffDivs) are PHS components:
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response (ASPR);
Office of Global Affairs (OGA);
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ);
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR);
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC);
Food and Drug Administration (FDA);
Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA);
Indian Health Service (IHS);
National Institutes of Health (NIH);    and
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA).
PHS volunteer service is uncompensated and may be accepted by a component of the PHS (identified in Section (E)(2)(a) immediately above) to supplement, but not take the place of, PHS employees who were hired via the usual recruitment process (45 CFR §§57.1 and 57.3).
PHS volunteer service can be accepted for the operation of any HHS health care facility defined at 45 CFR §57.2, or
PHS volunteer service can be accepted to provide health care (defined at 45 CFR §57.2) to patients in HHS heath care facilities; to beneficiaries of the federal government; or to individuals authorized for health services by HHS programs.
PHS volunteers must meet all medical and professional licensing requirements for the services they provide.
OpDivs/StaffDivs must enter into a formal written agreement with a PHS volunteer in accordance with 45 CFR §57.2.  See Section (G) Records below.
Human Resources Directors (HRD), or written designee, may establish volunteer program(s) for their serviced Division for the health care purposes described in 45 CFR §57.3, as long as the programs adhere to the rules covered in this guidance.
In addition to Section (E)(1)(f, g, h) above, PHS volunteers are eligible for protective clothing and equipment to be used in the performance of their assigned duties, and travel and transportation expenses under 5 U.S.C. §5703 (45 CFR §57.5).  Payment of travel and transportation expenses is made consistent with the HHS Travel Policy.  Travel and transportation questions should be directed to the ASA/Program Support Center (PSC).
PHS volunteers may be provided other benefits authorized by law or by administrative action by the HRD or written designee (45 CFR §57.5).  OpDivs/StaffDivs are strongly advised to consult their servicing legal counsel prior to authorizing other benefits to ensure such benefits are legally supportable with 45 CFR Part 57 and other applicable laws, regulations, etc. 
Miscellaneous
The restrictions on the employment of relatives (5 U.S.C. §3110) does not apply to volunteer service.
Volunteers are subject to the disclosure restriction described in 41 U.S.C. §2102.
If an OpDiv/StaffDiv wishes to consider establishing certain conduct requirements and enforcement mechanisms for the volunteers covered by this policy as a matter of contract, it must consult the OGC, General Law Division.
OpDivs/StaffDivs should consult their servicing legal counsel prior accepting volunteer service from a non-U.S. citizen to ensure the action and any related payments are legally supportable with the Consolidated Appropriations Act, i.e., the General Government Appropriations Act ban prohibits compensating an individual who is not a U.S. Citizen or national of the United States.
Volunteer service may be terminated at any time by either party and must be documented.
Records
A memorandum of understanding (MOU) is used to document volunteer service and must include the recommended information described in OPM’s Guide to Processing Personnel Actions, Chapter 33, Volunteer Service - PDF.
Records, including volunteer service agreements (MOU) and parental approval forms, must be retained for a total of four (4) full years after completion of the volunteer service, in accordance with the National Archives and Records Administration records schedule.  Records involved in litigation that are subject to a litigation hold must be preserved until an official litigation hold lift notice is received from OPM, Department of Justice, courts, the Office of the General Counsel, etc. that the matter has been fully litigated, or resolved, and closed. 
Guidance Information 
Owned by: ASA/Office of Human Resources, Policy and Accountability
Effective date: September 1, 2023
Contact Information: employmentpolicy@hhs.gov  



















531-1
Material Transmitted:

Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 531-1, Setting Pay Based on Superior Qualifications and Special Needs, dated December 10, 2010.

Material Superseded:

This Instruction supersedes a HHS Transmittal issued on September 7, 2007 which deleted HHS Instruction 338-2, Appointments Above the Minimum Rate Because of Superior Qualifications, issued January 30, 1996 and January 30, 1998, in its entirety.

Background:

In September 2007, HHS deleted the existing HHS Instruction regarding setting pay at rates above step one (1) of the General Schedule based on superior qualifications and/or a special need.  The HHS Instruction was deleted because the Instruction no longer complied with the regulatory requirements in 5 CFR 531.212 – Superior qualifications and special needs pay-setting authority.

This instruction provides guidance to Operating Divisions and Staff Divisions on criteria for setting pay for General Schedule employees at rates above step one (1) based on candidates’ superior qualifications and/or because candidates meet a special need of the agency.  Throughout the instruction, the use of the term OPDIV refers to both Operating Divisions and Staff Divisions.

This issuance is effective immediately.  Implementation under this issuance must be carried out in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, bargaining agreements, and Department policy.


						Denise L. Wells
						Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources


INSTRUCTION 531-1

 
SUBJECT:	SETTING PAY BASED ON SUPERIOR QUALIFICATIONS AND SPECIAL NEEDS

531-1-00	Purpose
531-1-10	References
531-1-20	Coverage and Exclusions
531-1-30	Responsibilities
531-1-40	General Policy
531-1-50	Delegation of Authority 
531-1-60	Procedures
531-1-70	Documentation and Accountability

531-1-00	PURPOSE

This Instruction outlines the requirements for setting basic pay at rates above the minimum rate for a given grade level if a candidate has superior qualifications and/or fills a special agency need. 

531-1-10         REFERENCES

A.	5 USC, § 5333 (Minimum rate for new appointments)
B.	5 CFR, § 531.212 (Superior qualifications and special needs pay-setting authority)

531-1-20	COVERAGE AND EXCLUSIONS

A.	Coverage
	This policy covers General Schedule (GS) employees.  

	The superior qualifications and special needs pay-setting authority may be used for –

1.	A first appointment (regardless of tenure) as a civilian employee of the Federal Government; or
2.	A reappointment that is considered a new appointment under the following conditions:
a.	When an employee has had a break in service of at least 90 days from the last period of civilian employment with the Federal Government; or
b.	When employment with the Federal Government during the 90-day period immediately preceding the appointment was limited to one or more of the following:
i.	Employment under a time-limited appointment in the competitive or excepted service;
ii.	Employment under an appointment as an expert or consultant under 5 U.S.C. 3109 and 5 CFR part 304;
iii.	Employment under a provisional appointment designated under 5 CFR 316.403;
iv.	Employment under a non-permanent appointment (excluding a Schedule C appointment under 5 CFR part 213) in the competitive or excepted service; and/or,
v.	Employment under the Student Career Experience Program under 5 CFR 213.3202(b).

Note: The appointment of a former member of a uniformed service (including the Commissioned Corps of the Public Health Service) as a first time Federal civilian is considered a new appointment for the purpose of this Instruction.  This is true without regard to the length of time between the former member’s exit from the uniformed service and his or her appointment as a civilian employee to include those who may be appointed to a civilian position while on terminal leave pending retirement from the uniformed service.

B.	Exclusions
	This policy does not apply to employees whose pay plan is other than GS.  HHS Instruction 532-1, Pay Setting – Federal Wage System (FWS), contains information regarding similar provisions for employees under the FWS.


531-1-30         RESPONSIBILITIES
A.		Office of Human Resources (OHR), Assistant Secretary for Administration (ASA), is responsible for:
1.	Updating and maintaining this policy;
2.	Advising operating Human Resources organizations on the administration of the authority to set pay based on superior qualifications and/or special needs; and,
3.	Coordinating any requested HHS reports to the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on the administration of this authority. 
B.	   Operating Divisions and Staff Divisions (OPDIVs) are responsible for:
1.	Ensuring compliance with the requirements of this policy within their respective organizations;
2.	Establishing procedures to ensure that all requirements for authorizing pay based on superior qualifications and/or special needs are properly approved, recorded, and documented; and,
3.	Establishing documentation and record-keeping requirements that are sufficient to allow reconstruction of the action taken in each case.  Records must be maintained for a minimum of three years.  Each request must include: (1) a description of the superior qualifications of the individual or the special need of the agency; (2) an explanation of the factors used to justify the rate at which the employee’s pay was set and how the factors directly relate to the rate approved; and, (3) the reasons for authorizing an advanced rate instead of (or in addition to) a recruitment incentive.
C.	Operating Human Resources Organizations (OHROs) are responsible for:
1.	Advising and consulting with OPDIVs on the use of this authority and alternative incentives;
2.	Verifying that candidates are eligible to receive an advanced rate of pay under this authority; and
3.	Making official salary offers to candidates for appointment.
D.	Supervisors, managers, and other hiring officials are responsible for: 
1.	Maintaining the confidentiality of the pay setting process.  Selecting officials must not initiate discussions of advanced rates of pay with candidates but may have a preliminary discussion of the subject when initiated by a candidate.  
2.	Upon initial employment with the Federal Government, the starting salary for most employees is expected to be the rate for step one (1) on the applicable salary schedule for the grade level being filled.  Initial salary offers must come from the OHRO.  
3.	If a candidate indicates he or she wishes to negotiate the salary offer, the OHRO will contact the hiring official to determine if he or she is interested in requesting approval to set the candidate’s pay at a higher rate.

531-1-40 	GENERAL POLICY

A.	An OPDIV may determine that a candidate has superior qualifications based on:

1.	The level, type, or quality of the candidate’s skills or competencies demonstrated or obtained through experience and/or education;
2.	The quality of the candidate’s accomplishments compared to others in the field; and/or
3.	Other factors that support a superior qualifications determination.
B.	When pay is set at an advanced rate based on superior qualifications, a candidate’s skills, competencies, experience, education, and/or accomplishments must be relevant to the requirements of the position to be filled.  These qualities must be significantly higher than that needed to be minimally qualified for the position and/or be of a more specialized quality compared to other candidates.
C.	An OPDIV may determine that a candidate fills a special need if the type, level, or quality of skills and competencies or other qualities and experiences possessed by the candidate are relevant to the requirements of the position and are essential to accomplishing an important agency mission, goal, or program activity.  A candidate also may meet the special need criteria by meeting agency workforce needs, as documented in the OPDIV’s strategic human capital plan.
D.	An OPDIV may consider one or more of the following factors to determine the step at which to set an employee’s pay using this authority:
1.	The level, type, or quality of the candidate’s skills or competencies;
2.	The candidate’s existing salary, recent salary history, or salary documented in a competing job offer (taking into consideration the location where the salary was or would be earned and comparing the salary to Federal pay rates in the same location);
3.	Significant disparities between Federal and non-Federal salaries for the skills and competencies required in the position to be filled;
4.	Existing labor market conditions and employment trends, including the availability and quality of candidates for the same or similar positions;
5.	The success of recent efforts to recruit candidates for the same or similar positions;
6.	Significant turnover in the same or similar positions;
7.	The importance/criticality of the position to be filled and the effect on the agency if it is not filled or if there is a delay in filling it;
8.	The desirability of the geographic location, duties, and/or work environment associated with the position;
9.	OPDIV workforce needs, as documented in the OPDIV’s strategic human capital plan; and/or
10.	Other relevant factors.
E.	Approving officials should exercise judgment when a candidate’s existing or recent salary is the basis for setting pay at an advanced rate.  Salary claims must be documented to ensure that only actual earnings are considered.
1.	Income from outside employment that forms a regular, continuing portion of the candidate's total income and that the candidate will not be able to continue as a Federal employee may be considered in setting the pay rate.  A written statement signed and dated by the candidate stating that the compensation will be forfeited must be included with the request for approval of an advanced rate of pay.  Income from other sources that will continue during Federal employment may not be considered.  
2.	Although benefits comparisons are not typically required, it may be appropriate to consider the value of Federal fringe benefits when evidence exists that a candidate’s current benefits are significantly less or greater than those offered to Federal employees.  In general, the value of Federal benefits can be considered to be 38% of an employee’s salary.  
3.	Annual Federal salary rates are based on a full-time work schedule of 40 hours per week.  The most meaningful comparisons between salaries are made between equalized conditions.  
a.	Normally, income earned from overtime work should not be considered when comparing salaries.  
b.	When considering the income of an individual who is employed on a part-time basis, comparing hourly rates of pay will provide a more accurate comparison of salaries.  
c.	Special care must be taken when considering bonuses and stock options so that only those amounts that can be adequately quantified and are a regular and recurring part of an individual’s income are considered.
4.	Compensation of a former (retired or resigned) member of a uniformed service (including the Commissioned Corps of the Public Health Service) may serve as a basis for setting pay under this Instruction.  Total pay, including regular allowances, may be included for salary comparison purposes.

F.	It is not appropriate to use the salary earned as a former expert or consultant for the Federal Government appointed under 5 USC 3109 to justify an advanced rate when an individual's last position is that of an expert or consultant for the Federal Government.  Income forfeited at the time the individual became an expert or consultant may be used for determining the appropriate step.

G.	An advanced rate may be based on earnings as an expert or consultant outside the Federal government.  The advanced rate should take into account average income earned by the candidate over the past two years and other legitimate and confirmed consulting offers the candidate may have.  The value of Federal benefits should be considered when comparing Federal salary rates with the compensation of independent consultants.  In many instances, independent consultants do not receive benefits and must pay the full cost of Social Security.

H.	Due to the developmental nature of such programs, it is inappropriate to use the superior qualifications and special needs pay-setting authority for the appointment of individuals in programs such as the Federal Career Intern Program, the Emerging Leaders Program, the Presidential Management Fellows Program, the Student Career Experience Program, the Student Temporary Employment Program, or comparable entry level, developmental programs.

I.	Under a vacancy announcement that covers multiple grade levels, if a candidate is not within reach for selection consideration at a higher grade level due to a veterans’ preference eligible, the OPDIV may only approve a limited advanced rate of pay if the candidate is selected at a lower grade level.  In such instances, an OPDIV may authorize an advanced rate of pay that is no greater than 94% of the step one (1) rate of pay for the higher grade level.

J.	In determining whether to use the superior qualifications and special needs pay-setting authority and the level at which the employee’s payable rate of basic pay should be set, an OPDIV must consider the possibility of authorizing a recruitment incentive under 5 CFR part 575, subpart A instead of, or in addition to, an advanced rate of pay.

531-1-50 	DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY

A.	Authority to approve an advanced rate of pay under 5 USC 5333 based on the superior qualifications of the candidate or a special need of the agency for the candidate's services is delegated to the Heads of Operating and Staff Divisions for employees and positions within their authority.  Further redelegation is authorized.  In exercising this approval authority, Heads of Operating and Staff Divisions may not approve an advanced rate of pay unless the action complies with the provisions of this Instruction and Federal regulations regarding superior qualifications and special needs pay-setting authority found in 5 CFR §531.212.
B.	Authority to appoint individuals in the Federal service and to set pay is delegated to the Directors of OHROs.  Further redelegation is authorized.  In exercising this authority, Directors of OHROs may not establish pay for an employee under this Instruction unless the action complies with the provisions of this Instruction and Federal regulations regarding superior qualifications and special needs pay-setting authority found in 5 CFR §531.212

531-1-60	PROCEDURES

A.	An official with delegated approval authority must approve each determination to use the superior qualifications and special needs pay-setting authority prior to the candidate entering on duty.  Once an employee has entered on duty, an advanced rate of pay under these procedures cannot be made prospectively or retroactively.
B.	Each determination must be made in writing and reviewed and approved by an official of the OPDIV who is at least one level higher than the employee’s supervisor, unless there is no official at a higher level in the OPDIV.

531-1-70	DOCUMENTATION AND ACCOUNTABILITY
A.	Documentation
1.	OPDIVs are required to ensure that each request to set pay at an advanced rate based on superior qualifications and/or a special need is properly approved, recorded, and documented.
2.	OPDIVs must document all of the following for each determination to use the superior qualifications and special needs pay-setting authority sufficient to allow reconstruction of the action taken in each case:
a.	The superior qualifications of the candidate and/or the special agency need for the candidate’s services that justifies a higher than minimum rate;
b.	An explanation of the factor(s) and supporting documentation which were used to justify the rate at which the employee’s pay is set.  The written documentation must explain how the factors directly relate to the rate approved; and,
c.	The reasons for authorizing a higher than minimum rate instead of or in addition to a recruitment incentive under 5 CFR part 575, subpart A.

B.	Accountability
The OHR, OHRO, and OPDIV will conduct such oversight activities as required to ensure that superior qualifications and special needs pay-setting authority is administered in accordance with law, regulations and HHS policies and procedures.























531-2
Material Transmitted:

HHS Instruction 531-2, Setting Salary

Material Superseded:

HHS Instruction 531-2 (all)
HHS Instruction 532-5 (all)
HHS Instruction 536-1 (all)

Background:
This Instruction has been revised consistent with recent changes in the organization of HHS,  and in support of HHS administrative initiatives  calling  for more  streamlined  rules  and greater delegations of authority.

Under this issuance, three Instructions have been consolidated because of similar subject matter and the  need for greater streamlining of the rules.

Any reference to "OPDIV" in this Instruction now includes the PHS agencies, the Office of the Secretary, the Program Support Center, HCFA, ACF, and AOA.

This issuance is effective immediately.  Implementation of this issuance must be carried out in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, bargaining agreements, and Departmental policy.

Filing Instructions:
Remove superseded material and file new material. Post receipt of this transmittal to the HHS Check List of Transmittals and file this transmittal in sequential order after the check list.





Eugene  Kinlow
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources, OASMB



INSTRUCTION 531-2

Distribution:  MS (PERS):  HRFC-001 
HHS PERSONNEL INSTRUCTION 531-2
POSITION CLASSIFICATION PROGRAM

531-2-00	Purpose and Authority
	10	References
	20	Pay Setting
	30	Grade and Pay Retention

531-2-00  PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY

This Instruction states the Department's policy and provides guidance concerning the determination of basic pay of General Schedule (GS) employees and the entitlement of GS and Federal Wage System (FWS) employees to grade and pay retention.

531-2-10  REFERENCES

A.	U.S. Code, Chapter 53 (law - pay rates and systems)
B.	CFR, Part 531 (regulations - pay under the General Schedule)
C.	CFR, Part 536 (regulations - grade and pay retention)
D.	HHS Instruction 338-2 (appointments above the minimum because of superior qualifications)
E.	HHS Instruction 351-1 (reduction in force (RIF))

531-2-20  PAY SETTING

A.	Highest Previous Rate

1.	When the use of the highest previous rate (HPR) is optional under Government-wide regulations, the Department's policy is that the manager who approves a Request for Personnel Action is authorized (unless otherwise provided) to approve the employee's rate of pay after consultation with the personnel officer or his/her designee. That rate of pay may be any rate between the basic rate for the position and the HPR, subject to the restriction in 531-2-20B below. In this situation, the employee has no entitlement to a particular rate of pay.

2.	When applying the HPR, care must be taken to avoid windfalls in pay for employees being reinstated or transferring from other Federal entities which have pay schedules that are substantially higher than GS pay rates.

3.	The HPR remains available for use in subsequent promotions or movement of the employee to another position, unless the restriction in 531-2-20B is applicable.
 

B.	Restriction
The HPR cannot be used unless an employee's most recent annual performance rating is fully successful or better.   If a performance rating is not available, because the individual involved is being reinstated or transferred from another agency from which the rating is unavailable,  a presumed fully successful rating shall be applicable.

C.	Effect of Temporary Promotion

The HPR may be used when setting salaries after temporary promotions of one year or more.  If the HPR is not used, the employee is placed at the step he/she would have attained had there been no temporary promotion.

D.	Change to Lower Grade for Cause

Employees who are changed to lower grades for personal cause cannot have their pay set pursuant to the HPR.  When employees are changed to lower grades for cause (e.g., inefficiency, less than fully successful performance, misconduct, etc.), their pay will be set in the lower grades so that there is a reduction in pay equivalent to at least two within-grade increases in the higher grade from which being reduced.  If a two-step equivalent computation falls between two steps of the lower grade, the lower step rate must be used. Management may set the employee's pay as low as the first step of the grade to which the employee is demoted.

NOTE :  In accordance with OPM Regulation 536.105, an employee who is downgraded for cause is not eligible for retained pay.  Therefore, if the employee's pay falls above Step 10 of the lower grade, his/her pay will be set at Step 10.

E.	Change to Lower Grade at Own Request (Including those involving transfers)

1.	The HPR cannot be used when an employee is changed to a lower grade at his/her own request, except as indicated in 2 below.  (If an employee is eligible for grade and pay retention, his/her salary should be set in accordance with 5 CFR 536.)

2.	When the employee-requested action also serves the convenience of the Government, the employees pay may be set at the step represented by the  
HPR, or a lower step.  The fact that an action series the convenience of the Government must be supported by documentation that reflects management's need for the employee's skills and knowledge in the specific situation and that filling the position with the employee avoids costs that would otherwise accrue through recruitment, reduction-in-force, etc.

3.	When an employee requests a change to a lower grade, to a position which is less than the top of a career ladder, the highest previous rate that may be used in setting the employee's salary is the rate in the lower grade which, upon  repromotion, will place the employee at the rate of pay he/she would have attained if the employee had remained in the former grade (unless the exception in 2 above applies).  This includes any step increases the employee would have received if he/she had remained at the higher grade during the period of qualifying for repromotion.  For example, if an employee would have received Step 3 of the former grade during that period, the rate of pay at Step 3 is used in determining the employees pay at the lower grade.

If the employee would not have been eligible for a step increase at the former grade between the time of the change to lower grade and the time the employee will qualify for repromotion, the step increase cannot be credited in setting the employee's pay at the lower grade.  For example, if the employee qualifies for promotion within 4 months after a change to a lower grade and the step increase at the higher grade is due in 9 months, that step increase cannot be credited.

F.	Special Pay Rates

Special pay rates for recruitment and retention as provided in 5 U.S. Code 5305 can be used as the HPR under the conditions outlined below:

1.	Reassignment must be from and to positions within the Department.

2.	The special rate must be the employee’s current rate of pay.

3.	The servicing personnel officer/designee with appointing authority for the position being filled (based on recommendations from both gaining and  
losing management officials) must determine that the need for servicees of the employee will be greater in the new position.

G.	Promotion from Federal Wage System

When a FWS employee is promoted to the GS, pay will be set in accordance with the HPR. This is because FWS employees promoted to GS positions are not entitled to a two-step increase. (See U.S. v. Clark - Supreme Court, 80-1121.)

H.	Documentation of Intended Use of the HPR

When a personnel office intends to use the HPR but does not have sufficient proof of an applicants or employees previous rate of pay, it cannot grant the HPR until it receives the necessary documentation. Pending receipt of the documentation, the servicing personnel office must annotate the employees Notification of Personnel Action (SF 50) with regard to its intent to use the HPR.  The employees pay will be set at the lowest step or other appropriate step of the grade until documentation is, received. Upon receipt of confirmation of the HPR, the employee's salary will be adjusted retroactively to the date of appointment. Acceptable documentation is an SF 50 or like document, or the employee's official earnings and leave statement.



531-2-30  GRADE AND PAY RETENTION

A.	Transfer and Reassignment of Employees

1.	Employees who are on grade retention are entitled to their retained grade in any position they hold. However, the appointing authority, at the request of the selecting official, may ask an employee to waive his/her retained grade at the time he/she is offered a transfer into the Department or a reassignment within the Department to a position at a lower grade than his/her retained grade. An employee who waives grade retention is not entitled to pay retention.

2.	An employee cannot waive entitlement to pay retention. Pay retention entitlement ceases only when one of the conditions stated in the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) regulations occurs.

B.	Disability

The appointing authority is authorized to grant pay retention to employees who are  
found to be disabled for their current position yet are willing to accept assignment to a lower graded position, the duties of which they are capable of performing.  The finding of disability must be supported by acceptable medical evidence. This policy is applicable regardless of whether an application for disability retirement has been filed or the disability retirement application has been denied.  Such employees are not entitled to grade retention.

C.	Optional Use of Grade and Pay Retention

Personnel officers or their designees may approve the use of grade or pay retention where such use is optional.

















531-4
HHS Instruction 531-4, Within-Grade and Quality Step Increases

Material Superseded:

HHS Instruction 531-4 (all)
HHS Instruction 531-5 (all)

Background:
This Instruction has been revised consistent with recent changes in the organization of HHS, and in support of HHS administrative initiatives calling for more streamlined rules and greater delegations of authority.

Under this issuance, two Instructions have been consolidated because of similar subject matter and greater streamlining of the rules.

Any reference to "OPDIV" in this Instruction now includes AHCPR, ATSDR, CDC, FDA, HRSA, IHS, NIH, SAMHSA, the Office of the Secretary, the program Support Center, HCFA, ACF, and AOA.

This issuance is effective immediately.  Implementation of this issuance must be carried out in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, and bargaining agreements.

Filing Instructions:
Remove superseded material and file new material.  Post receipt of this transmittal to the HHS Check List of Transmittals and file this transmittal in sequential order after the check list.





							John J. Callahan
							Assistant Secretary for
							Management and Budget


INSTRUCTION 531-4

Distribution:  MS (PERS):  HRFC-001
 
HHS INSTRUCTION 531-4
WITHIN-GRADE AND QUALITY STEP INCREASES

531-4-00	Purpose
	10	References
	20	Use or Nonuse of Forms

	Exhibit 351-4-A   Delegations of Authority

531-4-00  PURPOSE

This Instruction states the Department’s procedures for granting and witholding within-grade increases (WIGIs) and granting quality step increases (QSIs) in recognition of outstanding performance.

531-4-10  REFERENCES

A.	5 U.S. Code 5335 (law - periodic step increases)
B.	5 U.S. Code 5336 (law - additional step increases)
C.	5 CFR Part 531, Subpart D (regulations - within-grade increases)
D.	5 CFR Part 531, Subpart E (regulations - quality step increases)
E.	HHS Instruction 430-4 (Employee Performance Management System:  Performance Appraisal)
F.	HHS Instruction 430-7 (Performance Appraisal System)


531-4-2O  USE OR NONUSE OF FORMS

The Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) forms used to record WIGIS (Level of Competence Certification) and QSIS (DHHS Recommendation for Quality Increases) may continue to be used, OPDIVs may elect to use comparable forms, or OPDIVs may determine that there is no need for forms. Even if forms are not used, OPDIVs must have procedures in place to ensure that all requirements for WIGIS and QSIS are met. If OPDIVs want the system to generate the WIGI forms, they must continue to use the DHHS form.

 

DELEGATIONS OF AUTHORITY

A.	Authority Delegated

1.	I hereby delegate to all immediate supervisors, through the officials in the line of supervision above them, (a) the authority to make favorable and negative level of competence determinations for periodic within-grade increases for the employees under their supervision and (b) the authority to reverse or sustain a negative determination upon request of an employee for reconsideration of a negative determination.

2.	A Head of an OPDIV, including the Assistant Secretary for Management and Budget for employees of the Office of the Secretary, if he or she elects, may delegate to some official other than the immediate supervisor the authority in paragraph l(b) above.

3.	I hereby delegate to all immediate and second level supervisors, through the officials in the line of supervision above them, the authorities, respectively, to recommend quality step increases and to concur and nonconcur in quality step increases for the employees under their supervision.

4.	Information and guidance for exercising the above authorities is found in 5 CFR Part 531, Subparts D and E.

B.	Prior Delegations

This delegation supersedes all prior delegations.  To the extent that previous delegations of authority to make favorable and negative level of competence determinations for periodic within-grade increases and to reverse or sustain a negative determination, or recommend quality step increases and to concur and nonconcur in quality step increases are consistent with the provisions of this delegation, they may remain in effect until new redelegations are made under the authority of this delegation.
	
C.	Effective Date

This delegation is effective on the date of this transmittal.


























532-1
532-1-00 	PURPOSE 

This Instruction promulgates the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) pay setting policy for employees covered by the Federal Wage System (FWS).  The FWS is a uniform pay-setting system applicable to Federal appropriated and non-appropriated fund blue-collar or wage grade employees paid by the hour.   

The FWS establishes pay rates for employees whose pay is fixed and adjusted periodically in accordance with the prevailing wage rates in local wage areas.  This pay system covers Federal trades, crafts, laborers, and other blue-collar or wage grade jobs. 

The Department is responsible for ensuring prevailing rates of pay, established during the wage survey process, are applied to prevailing rate employees in accordance with this Instruction and OPM requirements.  Prevailing rates of pay will be established for each wage area in which the Department has employees.  In accordance with existing statute, the wage survey process must involve the participation of labor organizations representing prevailing rate employees.

532-1-10 	REFERENCES

A.	5 USC Chapter 53, Subchapter IV (Law - Pay Rates and Systems)
B.	5 USC Chapter 55, Subchapter V (Premium Pay)
C.	5 CFR Part 315, Subpart I (Regulations - Probation on Initial Appointment to a Supervisory or Managerial Position)
D.	5 CFR Part 532 (Regulations - Prevailing Rate Systems)
E.	5 CFR Part 536 (Regulations - Grade and Pay Retention)
F.	5 CFR Part 550 (Regulations – Pay Administration)
G.	5 CFR Part 551 (Pay Administration under the Fair Labor Standards Act)
H.	HHS Instruction 430-1 (Performance Management and Appraisal Program)
I.	HHS Collective Bargaining Agreements
J.	Operating Manual - Federal Wage System 

532-1-20	DEFINITIONS

A.	Highest Previous Rate (HPR).  The highest rate of basic pay previously received by a person employed in a civilian position in any part of the Federal Government.  This includes service with the government of the District of Columbia for employees first employed by that government before October 1, 1987. 

B.	Local Wage Areas.  Specific geographic areas and/or industries surveyed during the wage surveys process.

C.	Pay Plans.  WG = wage grade; WL = wage leader; WS = wage supervisor; WT = worker trainee.

D.	Prevailing Rates of Pay.  Pay rates that are comparable to prevailing levels of pay for comparable levels of work in the private sector within a local wage area.

E.	Representative Rates.  Used to compare grades that are under different pay systems after applying any applicable geographic conversion.  For FWS positions, it is the highest rate of basic pay that applies to the second step of the grade. 

F.	Special Pay Rates. OPM-approved supplements to regular pay rates used to address recruitment or retention issues due to higher non-federal pay rates, geographic remoteness of the area where jobs are locate, or undesirable working conditions. 

G.	Wage Survey Process.  A market-based survey conducted by the Department of Defense to set rates of pay on each regular FWS wage schedule with the advice of a labor-management wage committee. 

532-1-30 	COVERAGE AND EXCLUSIONS

A.	Coverage.  This Instruction covers HHS FWS employees.  It also covers FWS pay-setting matters that address both regulatory and discretionary requirements.

B.	Exclusions.  This instruction does not cover the wage survey process or the FWS job grading system.  The survey process is sufficiently covered in OPM regulation and guidance.  The  job grading system is covered in OPM’s Job Grading System.

532-1-40	RESPONSIBILITIES

Operating Human Resource Organizations (OHROs) are responsible for:

A.		Setting pay for newly appointed employees and for employees who are reemployed, reassigned, transferred, promoted, or changed to a lower grade;  

B.		Making new or revised wage schedules effective on the date specified on the schedule for all covered employees within the local wage area; 

C.		Paying Environmental Differential Pay (EDP) to FWS employees; and

D.		Establishing FWS apprentice schedules to cover FWS Worker Trainees. 

532-1-50	FWS PAY-SETTING

A.	New Appointments.  Except as provided in 532-1-50 (B) and (C) below, a new appointment shall be made at the minimum rate of the grade.

B.	Appointments Above the Minimum Rate.
1.	Operating Human Resource Organizations (OHROs) may make new appointments at a rate above the minimum rate of the appropriate grade in recognition of special qualifications, exceptional skills or qualifications, or highly specialized expertise in a particular trade or craft critical to mission accomplishment.  When an applicant is appointed to a step higher than the minimum, the merit promotion files and the remarks on the Notification of Personnel Action, Standard Form 50, should document the basis for the higher step.
2.	Appointments above minimum rates for jobs in specific hard-to-fill occupations.  The lead  agency (The Department of Defense) for a local wage area may authorize use of any scheduled rate above the minimum rate as the appointment rate for one or more grades of an occupation at one or more locations within a wage area based upon the following: 
a.	The hiring prevailing rate for a particular occupation and grade in the private sector in a specific location is higher than the minimum rate for the comparable grade on the local Federal wage schedule; and 
b.	Local Federal installations and activities cannot recruit qualified employees at that minimum rate.
C.		Use of Highest Previous Rate (HPR). When an employee is reemployed, reassigned, transferred, promoted, or changed to a lower grade, the OHRO may set pay at any rate of the new grade that does not exceed the employee’s highest previous rate.  However, if the rate of pay falls between two step-rates of the new grade, the OHRO will set pay at the higher of the two.

1.	The rate or step selected for the employee should be comparable to the rate and step employees receive in the same or similar jobs with similar qualifications.  The OHRO, after consultation with the hiring manager, will set the rate of pay at any rate between the minimum step of the position and the HPR.
2.	When an employee is demoted at his or her request, with the prospect of repromotion back to the former grade as soon as possible under merit promotion rules, the HR Specialist, in consultation with the OPDIV hiring manager, will select a rate in the lower grade which upon promotion will place the employee in a rate of the higher grade which he/she would have attained if he/she had remained at that grade. 
3.	The HPR remains available for use in subsequent promotions or movement of the employee to another position, unless the restriction in 532-1-50(C) (4) below applies.
4.	The HPR will not be used when an employee's most recent performance rating of record is less than fully successful or the equivalent.  If a current performance rating is not available from the employee’s most recently employed agency, a presumed fully successful rating shall be applicable.  
5.	Documentation of Intended Use of the HPR.  Acceptable HPR documentation is an SF 50 or a similar document, or the employee’s official earnings and leave statement.  When an OHRO intends to use the HPR but does not have sufficient proof of an applicant's or an employee’s previous rate of pay, it cannot grant the HPR until it receives the necessary documentation.  The following steps will be taken:
a.	The employee's pay will be set at the lowest step or another appropriate step in the grade until documentation is received. 
b.	Pending receipt of the documentation, the OHRO must annotate the intent to use the HPR  in the remarks section of  the SF 50. 
c.	Upon receipt of confirmation of the HPR, the employee's pay will be adjusted retroactively to the date of appointment. 
D.	Promotion.  A promoted employee is entitled to be paid at the lowest scheduled rate of pay which exceeds the employee’s existing rate of pay by at least four (4) percent of the representative rate (i.e. normally step two of a five step regular wage schedule) of the grade from which s(he) was promoted. If there is no rate in grade to which the employee is promoted which meets this entitlement, the employee is entitled to: 
1.	The existing rate of pay; or
2.	The maximum scheduled rate of the grade s(he) was promoted to, whichever is higher. 

E.	Promotion to a Position in a Different Wage Area.  The employee's pay entitlement shall be determined as if there were two pay actions; a promotion and a reassignment.  The actions shall be processed in the order which gives the employee the maximum benefit.

F.	Temporary Promotion.  Rates of pay earned for more than one year under a temporary promotion are highest previous rates.  Upon return to a lower grade immediately following a temporary promotion, the employee’s existing rate of pay is the rate used to set pay provided the temporary promotion grade in which the higher rate was earned was held for more than one year.  When a temporary promotion is made permanent immediately after the temporary promotion ends, the employee is not returned to the lower grade in order to process the permanent promotion.  The employee’s temporary promotion is converted to a permanent promotion without a change in pay.

G.	Details.  An appropriated fund FWS employee detailed to a position other than the position to which appointed shall be paid at the rate of the position to which appointed. 

H.	Simultaneous Actions.  If an employee is entitled to more than one pay change concurrently, the OHRO will process the pay changes in the order which will provide the employee the maximum pay benefit.  If an employee is entitled to both and increase in pay and a personnel or appointment change at the same time, the increased rate of pay is deemed the employee’s existing rate of pay when the personnel or appointment change is processed.

I.	Grade Retention.  Allows an employee to retain the grade of his/her position for pay administration purposes for 2 years after placement in a lower-graded position. 

1.	Employee Eligibility.  The employee is entitled to grade retention if (s)he meets the criteria indicated and has been placed in a lower-graded position for one of the following reasons:
a.	Reduction in Force (RIF).  An employee must have served for at least 52 consecutive weeks in a permanent appointment in a position under the Federal Wage System at a grade or higher than the position to which the employee is being demoted because of the RIF.  The time served could have been in more than one position and in more than one OPDIV.
b.	Classification to a lower grade.  When an employee is downgraded to correct a classification error or to implement a new classification standard, (s)he is entitled to grade retention if the position that is being downgraded has been classified at the higher grade for at least 1 continuous year immediately before the action. 
2.  Termination of Grade Retention.  Grade retention terminates after 2 calendar years.  It also terminates if the employee: 
a.	Has a break in service of one workday or more;
b. 	Is demoted for personal cause or at his or her own request from the grade actually occupied;
c.	Moves to a position under a covered pay system with a grade that is equal to or higher than the retained grade, excluding a temporary promotion;
d. 	Declines a reasonable offer of a position at or above the retained grade;
e.	Elects in writing to have grade retention terminated; or
f. 	Moves to a position not under a covered pay system.

J.	Pay Retention.  Allows an employee to keep his/her former rate of pay when that pay is higher than the maximum rate of the grade in which the employee is placed.  (Note:  ‘Pay retention’ is similar to ‘saved rate’ which was applicable to the Federal Wage System prior to the Civil Service Reform Act of 1978).

1.   Employee Eligibility.   Pay retention must be provided to an employee in a position under a covered pay system whose payable rate of basic pay otherwise would be reduced as a result of:
a.   The expiration of the 2-year grade retention period;
b.   A RIF or reclassification that places the employee in a lower-graded position when the employee does not meet grade retention eligibility requirements;
c.   A management action that places an employee in a government-wide training program, such as upward mobility, apprenticeship, or career intern;
d.   A reduction or elimination of special rate schedules or a management action that places an employee in a non-special rate or lower-paid special rate position;
e.   A management action that places an employee in a different (lower) pay schedule; or 
f.   An entitlement to a payable rate upon promotion that exceeds the top step of the grade to which (s)he is promoted. 

2.	Pay Rate Setting
a.  Geographic Conversion Rule.  The rule must be applied before determining pay if the employee’s official worksite is covered by a different locality schedule as a result of a pay retention entitlement action.  The employee’s rate of basic pay must be converted to the applicable schedule in the new location before the demotion.
b.   The employee receives the rate of pay before placement in the lower grade on whichever is higher:
i.   Locality schedule for the new official worksite; or
ii.  Special rate schedule that applies to the former position.
c.  An employee entitled to pay retention is entitled to the lowest rate of basic pay in the employee’s grade after the action is taken which equals or exceeds his or her current rate of basic pay.   If there is no such rate, then the employee retains either his or her current rate of basic pay or 150 percent maximum rate of basic pay for the employee’s grade after the action is taken, whichever is less.
3.    Pay Increases While on Pay Retention.  An employee receiving pay retention is entitled to 50% of any change in the maximum rate for the employee’s position of record.  This change may occur as a result of adjustments to nationwide, locality, or special salary rate schedules. 
4.	Termination of Pay Retention. Pay retention terminates when an employee: 
a.	Has a break in service of one work day or more;
b.	Is demoted for personal cause or at his or her own request;
c.	Becomes entitled to a rate of basic pay which is equal to or greater than the retained rate;
d.	Declines a reasonable offer to a position with a rate equal to or greater than the retained rate; or
e.	Moves to a position not under a covered pay system.

K.	Pay Setting upon Removal from Position during Probation
1.    A supervisor or manager who fails to successfully complete the required supervisory/managerial probationary period will be placed in a position of no lower grade step than the job (s)he left to accept the supervisory or managerial position.
2.  A nonsupervisory or non-managerial employee who is demoted into a position in which a probationary period is required, and who, for reasons of managerial/supervisory performance, does not complete the probationary period is entitled to be reassigned to a position at the same grade and pay as the position in which he/she was serving during the probationary period. 

L.	Change to Lower Grade. An employee is paid as follows when reduced in grade:

1.	Change to Lower Grade at an Employee’s Request.  When an employee initiates a request, the employee’s pay will be determined by placing his/her HPR in the lower grade.  If the HPR falls between two steps, the employee’s maximum payable rate is set at the lower step.  

2.	Change to Lower Grade When Beneficial to the Department. 
a.	When an employee is placed in a lower-graded position because of a management action such as reduction in force or reclassification, the employee’s pay will be set by placing his/her maximum payable rate in the lower grade.  If the maximum payable rate falls between two steps, the employee’s rate is set at the higher step.  The employee may be eligible for grade and/or pay retention upon meeting specific eligibility requirements enumerated in 532-1-50 I. and J.
b.	The pay setting action must be documented in writing, demonstrating a benefit to the Government by reflecting management's need for the employee's knowledge and skills and the avoidance of costs associated with recruitment, reduction in force, training, etc.  When the higher grade from which the employee is being changed to lower grade is covered by special salary rates, the higher graded position must also be within HHS and the appointing authorities covering both positions must agree that the lower graded assignment is in the best interest of the Government.
3.	Change to Lower Grade to Enter a Developmental Position.  When an employee requests a change to a lower grade to accept a position which is less than the top of a career ladder, the highest rate that may be used in setting the employee’s salary is the rate in the lower grade which, upon repromotion, will place the employee at the rate of pay he/she would have attained if the employee had remained in the higher grade, unless the employee is covered by grade and/or pay retention.  This includes any step increases the employee would have received if he/she had remained at the higher grade during the period of time used to qualify for repromotion.  For example, if an employee would have received step 3 of the former grade during that period, the rate of pay at step 3 is used in determining the employee’s pay at the lower grade.
4.   Change to Lower Grade for Personal Cause.  Employees changed to lower grades for personal cause shall not have their pay set in accordance with the HPR.  When an employee is changed to a lower grade for personal cause (e.g., inefficiency, less than fully successful performance, misconduct, etc.), his/her pay will be reduced the equivalent of at least two within-grade increases of the higher grade from which reduced.  If the two-step equivalent computation (based on an hourly rate) falls between two steps of the lower grade, the lower step rate must be used. Management may set the employee's pay as low as the first step of the grade to which the employee is demoted.  However, when an employee's pay, using the above computation, falls above step 5 of the lower grade, the rate of pay will be set at step 5.  An employee who is reduced in grade for personal cause is not eligible for grade or pay retention.  However, in situations where an employee is unable to perform the duties of the position assigned due to a physical or medical condition beyond the employee’s control, the reduction in grade is not considered for personal cause.  

532-1-60	WITHIN-GRADE INCREASES (WGIs)

A.	Entitlement.  A FWS employee will be automatically advanced to the next higher within-grade step (following completion of the required period of creditable service) provided the employee has a work performance rating of satisfactory or better and has not received an equivalent increase in pay during his or her waiting period.  

B. 	However, consistent with the HHS performance management regulations and collective bargaining agreements, supervisors and managers should consult with OHROs as soon as an employee’s performance falls below the satisfactory level to determine the appropriate course of action. 

C.  	Within-grade increases—waiting periods.

1.	Nonsupervisory and leader employees. 
a.   For a full-time nonsupervisory or leader employee, and for a part-time nonsupervisory or  leader employee with a prearranged regularly scheduled tour of duty, the waiting periods for advancement to the second, third, fourth, and fifth rates in all grades are:
i.	Rate 2 – 26 calendar weeks of creditable service in rate 1.
ii.	Rate 3 – 78 calendar weeks of creditable service in rate 2.
iii.	Rates 4 and 5 – 104 weeks of creditable service in each of steps 3 and 4.
b. 	For a part-time nonsupervisory or leader employee without a prearranged regularly scheduled tour of duty, the waiting period for advancement to the second, third, fourth, and fifth rates in all grades are: 
i.	Rate 2 – 130 days of creditable service in a pay status in rate 1 over a period of no less than 26 calendar weeks.
ii.	Rate 3 – 390 days of creditable service in a pay status in rate 2 over a period of no less than 78 calendar weeks. 
iii.	Rate 4 – 520 days of creditable service in a pay status in rate 3 over a period of no less than 104 weeks.
iv.	Rate 5 – 520 days of creditable service in a pay status in rate 4 over a period of no less than 104 weeks.
Any day on which a part-time service is performed constitutes a full day. 
2.   Supervisory employees. 
a.	For a full-time supervisory employee, and for a part-time supervisory employee with a prearranged regularly scheduled tour of duty, the waiting periods for advancement to the second, third, fourth, and fifth rates in all grades are: 
i.	Rate 2 – 26 weeks of creditable service in rate 1; 
ii.	Rate 3 – 78 weeks of creditable service in rate 2; 
iii.	Rate 4 – 104 weeks of creditable service in rate 3; and 
iv.	Rate 5 – 104 weeks of creditable service in rate 4.
b.  For a part-time supervisory employee without a prearranged regularly scheduled tour of duty, the waiting period for advancement to the second, third, fourth, and fifth rates in all grades are:
i.	Rate 2 – 130 days of creditable service in a pay status in rate 1 over a period of no less than 26 calendar weeks; 
ii.	Rate 3 – 390 days of creditable service in a pay status in rate 2 over a period of no less than 78 calendar weeks; 
iii.	Rate 4 – 520 days of creditable service in a pay status in rate 3 over a period of no less than 104 calendar weeks; 
iv.	Rate 5 – 520 days of creditable service in a pay status in rate 4 over a period of no less than 104 calendar weeks.
Any day on which a part-time service is performed constitutes a full day. 

3.	Start of waiting period.  A waiting period starts: 
a.	At the beginning of a new appointment as an employee of the Federal Government or the government of the District of Columbia; 
b.	After a nonpay period or a break in service when the non-pay period or break in service exceeds 52 calendar weeks; or 
c.	Upon receiving an equivalent increase.

NOTE:  For purposes of this section, a calendar week is a period of any 7 calendar days. 

D.  	Effective Date.  A within-grade increase is made effective at the beginning of the first applicable pay period following the date an employee becomes eligible for the increase.

532-1-70	APPLICATION OF WAGE SCHEDULES

A.  	The lead agency shall issue nonsupervisory, leader, and supervisory regular wage schedules for the local wage area, showing the rates of pay for all grades and steps.  The wage schedules shall have a single effective date for all employees in the local wage area.  The Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management (ASAM) shall authorize the application of the wage schedules issued by the lead agency for HHS employees in the local wage areas. 

B.	Delayed Application of a Wage Schedule.  No employee will be required to suffer a hardship because of a delayed application of a pay schedule.  Hence, no retroactive change will be made if the actions taken and payments made during the period of retroactivity are more advantageous to the employee than the rate from the new schedule.  

532-1-80	MOVEMENTS BETWEEN PAY SYSTEMS, WAGE SCHEDULES AND WAGE AREAS

A.	Movements from General Schedule (GS) to FWS. In order to determine the appropriate rate of pay, these steps should followed:
1.	Convert the annual rate of GS pay to an hourly rate of pay by dividing the annual rate by 2,087.
2.	Compare the representative rates for GS and FWS grades to determine the appropriate nature of action (i.e., the second rate on a five-rate regular wage schedule, the fourth rate on the General Schedule).
3.	Set pay at the maximum payable rate of the grade in which placed as appropriate.

B.	Movement from GS to FWS in a non-foreign overseas area (i.e., travel to or within Alaska or Hawaii).  Any non-foreign area differential or cost-of-living allowance an employee is receiving in the General Schedule job is added to his/her scheduled rate of pay for establishing the rate of pay in the FWS position.  The non-foreign area differential or cost-of-living allowance is not added to the representative rate when determining the nature of the action.

532-1-90	ENVIRONMENTAL DIFFERENTIAL PAY (EDP)

OHROs are responsible for paying FWS employees an EDP when the employee is performing assigned duties which expose him/her to an usually severe hazard, physical hardship, or working condition in the following circumstances: 

A.	Hazard which could result in significant injury, illness, or death.

B.	Hardship under circumstances which cause significant physical discomfort or distress; or 

C.	Working condition involving exposure to fumes, dust, or noise which causes significant distress or discomfort.

Efforts to avoid and/or protect employees from such hazards, physical hardships, or working conditions is of utmost priority. EDP is paid only where such exposure is unavoidable.

B.	Authorized environmental differentials for exposure to various degrees of hazards, physical hardships, and working conditions are enumerated in 5 CFR, Part 532, “Appendix A to Subpart E-Schedule of Environmental Differentials Paid for Exposure to Various Degrees of Hazards, Physical Hardships, and Working Conditions of an Unusual Nature”. An employee will not be paid for more than one EDP for a particular period of work. EDP is computed based on the highest EDP rate authorized for the period of entitlement.  The hours covered by EDP shall not exceed the number of hours worked by the employee on the day of exposure except as required by 5 CFR § 532.511(b)(3). 

C.	Relationship to other Pay.  EDP is included as part of an employee’s basic rate of pay and must be used to compute premium pay (e.g. pay for overtime, holiday, or Sunday work) and deductions for retirement and life insurance.  However, it is not part of basic pay for purposes of lump-sum annual leave payments and severance pay nor is the loss of this pay an adverse action. 

532-1-100	PREMIUM PAY

A.	The Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) of 1938 (as amended) covers any employee of an agency who is not specifically excluded by another statute and is not FLSA exempt (meaning not covered by the overtime provisions of the FLSA).  Generally, FWS employees are presumed to be FLSA nonexempt (meaning covered by the overtime provisions of the FLSA) unless management proves otherwise.”   See 5 C.F.R. 551.202(a).  The section on Premium Pay addresses HHS policy as it relates to FLSA non-exempt employees, unless otherwise stated.

B.	Overtime Pay.  FWS non-exempt employees are entitled to be paid for authorized and approved overtime worked in excess of 8 hours in a day or in excess of 40 hours in an administrative week, whichever results in the greater number of overtime hours including irregular and occasional overtime work and regular overtime work. 

1.	Nonsupervisory FWS Employees.  A nonsupervisory FWS employee is presumed to be nonexempt under the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (FLSA) and shall be paid for overtime work performed at the rate of 1.5 times the employee’s normal wage rate.  A nonsupervisory FWS employee is considered exempt if (s)he is performing temporary work or duties that meet FLSA exemption criteria.
2.	Supervisory FWS Employees.  A supervisory FWS employee is presumed to be non-exempt under the FLSA and shall be paid for overtime work performed at the rate of 1.5 times the employee’s normal wage rate.  A supervisory FWS employee is considered exempt if the employee meets the FLSA executive, administrative, or foreign exemption criteria, or performs temporary work or duties that meet FLSA exemption criteria.
3.   Exempt employees may be paid overtime on an hour-for-hour basis (that is 1.0 times the hourly rate). An employer may require an exempt employee to accept compensatory time instead of overtime premium pay.  However, non-exempt employees must be given the choice between 1.5 overtime pay or compensatory time off.

C.  	Compensatory Time Usage. 
1.  At a non-exempt employee’s request, OPDIVs may grant compensatory time off from an employee’s tour of duty instead of overtime payment, for an equal amount of irregular or occasional authorized and approved overtime.  OPDIVs cannot require non-exempt FWS employees to receive compensation for overtime with an equal amount of compensatory time off from his/her tour of duty. 
2.	If accrued compensatory time off is not used within 26 pay periods or if employees transfer to another agency or separate from Federal service before the expiration of the 26 pay period time limit, employees must be paid for the earned compensatory time off at the overtime rate in effect when earned.

D.	Night Shift Differentials, Holiday Pay, and Sunday Pay.

1.	Night Shift Differentials.  Employees may be entitled to be paid a night shift differential for the circumstances enumerated below:
a.	Absence on holidays.  An employee regularly assigned to a shift for which a night shift differential is payable shall be paid the night shift differential for a period of excused absence on a legal holiday or other day off from duty granted by Executive or administrative order.  
	b.	Travel status.   An employee regularly assigned to a shift for which a night shift differential is payable shall be paid the night shift differential for hours of the employee's tour of duty while in official travel status, regardless of whether the employee is performing work.   
      c.	Temporary tour of duty.  An employee regularly assigned to a: 
i.   Night shift who is temporarily assigned to a day shift or to a night shift having a lower night shift differential shall continue to receive the regular night shift differential, a temporary detail for training purposes is also included  (5 CFR 410.602).
ii.  Night shift, who is temporarily assigned to another night shift having a higher differential, shall be paid the higher differential if a majority of the employee's regularly scheduled non-overtime hours of work on the temporary shift fall within hours having the higher differential.
ii. Day shift who are temporarily assigned to a night shift shall be paid a night shift differential.
    
     d.	Leave with pay.  An employee:
i.   Regularly assigned to a night shift shall be paid a night shift differential during a period of leave with pay.
ii. Regularly assigned to a day shift who is temporarily assigned to a night shift shall be paid a night shift differential for any leave with pay taken when scheduled to work night shifts.
iii. Assigned to regular rotating schedule involving work on both day and night shifts shall be paid a night shift differential only for any leave with pay taken when scheduled to work night shifts.
iv. Who is not regularly assigned to a day shift or a night shift but whose shift is changed at irregular intervals shall be paid a night shift differential during leave with pay if the employee received a night shift differential for the last shift worked preceding leave with pay.
  
2.	Holiday Pay. Employees who are entitled to holiday premium pay and who perform work on a holiday which is not overtime work shall be paid the employee’s rate of basic pay plus premium pay at a rate equal to the rate of basic pay for holiday work that is not in access of 8 hours.
a.   Employee shall be paid for overtime work performed on a holiday at the same rate as for overtime paid on other workdays.   
b.   Employees entitled to holiday premium pay and required to report for work on a holiday shall be paid at least two hours of holiday pay whether or not work is actually performed.

3.	Sunday Pay.  An employee whose regular work schedule includes an 8-hour period of service that is not overtime work, a part of which is Sunday, is entitled to additional pay at the rate of 25 percent of his hourly rate of basic pay for each hour of work performed during that 8-hour period of service.  For employees serving outside the United States in areas where Sunday is a routine workday and another day of the week is officially recognized as the day of rest and worship, the Secretary of State may designate the officially recognized day of rest and worship as the day with respect to which the preceding sentence shall apply instead of Sunday.

      Full-time employees whose regular tours of duty include Sunday must be paid up to 8-hours of Sunday premium while in a paid leave or excused absence status during that Sunday tour.  (U. S. court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit – Armitage, et. Al. v. United States).

532-1-110	WAGE COMMITTEE

A.	The lead agency would have the responsibility for establishing an agency wage committee for the purpose of considering matters relating to the conduct of wage surveys, the establishment of wage schedules, and making recommendations thereon to the lead agency.
    
B.	If the lead agency terminates a wage schedule, the OHRO servicing the OPDIV in which the wage schedule applies shall discuss the termination with the appropriate official or officials of exclusively recognized employee organizations representing employees in the affected occupation.
    
532-1-120	DOCUMENTATION AND ACCOUNTABILITY

All regulatory discretionary actions should be documented on the SF-50.  This includes (but is not limited to) appointments above the minimum rate, use of highest previous rate, grade and pay retention and change to lower grade. 

























532-7

Subject:   ESTABLISHMENT OF TEMPORARY OR SEASONAL CONSTRUCTION
	    PAY RATES

 532-7-00	Purpose and Authority
	10	Coverage
	20	References
	30	Policy
	40	How Rates are Determined
	50	Adjustment of Rates

532-7-00     PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY

This Instruction states the Department's policy and procedures for establishing the rates of pay for employees who perform construction work on Public Law (P.L.) 86-121 projects.  The provisions of this Instruction have been developed under the authority provided to departments by FPM Supplement 532-1, Appendix V, for P.L. 86-121 projects to construct sanitary facilities for Native Americans.

532-7-10     COVERAGE

This Instruction covers temporary or seasonally-hired employees who
perform craft, trade, and labor work on P.L. 86-121 projects which provide
for the construction, repair, and maintenance of sanitary facilities for
American Indians and Alaskan natives.

532-7-20     REFERENCES

A.	Public Law 86-121 (law authorizing construction, repair and maintenance of sanitary facilities for Native Americans)
	
B.	Davis-Bacon Act (40 U.S.C. 276a, wage rates for laborers, craftsmen, and mechanics involved in construction on which Federal funds are expended)
	
C.	FPM Supplement 532-1, Appendix V, paragraph H (construction schedules)

532-7-30     POLICY

It is the policy of this Department to set temporary or seasonal construction rates consistent with published Davis-Bacon Act rates of pay for labor, trades, and crafts employees and any restrictions imposed on pay by the President, the Congress, or the Office of Personnel Management.. 

532-7-40     HOW RATES ARE DETERMINED

Rates for temporary or seasonal construction employees are determined in accordance with Davis-Bacon pay rates issued by the Department of Labor (DOL).  These rates are issued by DOL for use by the private sector and other Federal agencies.  They are used in arriving at comparable pay rates for employees working on Federally funded construction projects in specific geographic areas within the United States.  These rates reflect the minimum wage payable for blue collar employees working for contractors on Federally sponsored highway, residential, and highrise construction. Whenever available, residential construction rates are used. If residential rates are unavailable, highway construction rates will be used. If Davis-Bacon rates are unavailable, the Department may use survey rates from any other available source.  As stated in 532-7-30, all pay rates must comply with any restriction imposed by the President, Congress, or the Office of Personnel Management.

532-7-50     ADJUSTMENT OF RATES

Temporary or seasonal construction wages will be reviewed and appropriate adjustments made annually by the Division of Pay and Performance Programs. The adjustments will normally be made in the first quarter of the calendar year so as to be available for the construction season. The Division will specify effective dates and forward adjusted rates to affected servicing personnel offices for implementation.
























537-1
537-1-10	PURPOSE

This Instruction implements the Department of Health and Human Services Student Loan Repayment Program (SLRP) as a management tool to facilitate the recruitment and retention of highly qualified candidates and employees.  The SLRP authorizes the repayment of all or part of an outstanding federally insured student loan obligation incurred by a current employee or a candidate to whom an offer of employment has been made.  The decision to offer SLRP is an individual compensation determination that is made on a case-by-case basis based on organizational need, specific case justification, and budgetary limitations without regard to political affiliation, race, color, religion, national origin, sex (including pregnancy and gender identity) marital status, age disability, genetic information, sexual orientation, labor orientation, status as a parent, any other non-merit based factor, unless permitted by statute, or retaliation for exercising a right as a member of any of these categories. 

The SLRP is not an entitlement and is to be used only to the extent that is necessary for effective recruitment and retention purposes.

When provisions of this policy differ from changes in applicable law or regulation, the changes in law or regulation apply.

537-1-20	COVERAGE AND EXCLUSIONS

A.	Coverage.

Subject to the conditions in 5 U.S.C. 5379 and this Instruction, Operating Divisions (OpDivs)/Staff Divisions (StaffDivs) may approve student loan repayment benefits to recruit a highly qualified job candidate or retain a highly qualified employee who, during the service period established under a service agreement (consistent with § 537.107), will be serving under: 




1.	An appointment other than a time-limited appointment; or

2.	A time-limited appointment if –

a.	The employee (or job candidate) will have at least 3 years remaining under the appointment after the beginning of the service period established under a service agreement; or

b.	The time-limited appointment authority leads to conversion to another appointment of sufficient duration so that his or her employment with the agency is projected to last for at 
least 3 additional years after the beginning of the service period established under a service agreement.

B.	Exclusions. The following employees are ineligible for the Federal SLRP:

1.	Individuals whose federally insured student loans are past due, delinquent, or defaulted;

2.	Those appointed to positions of a confidential, policy determining, policy making, or policy advocating nature (e.g. under Schedule C or 5 CFR §213.3301); 

3.	Individuals who received their diplomas/degrees from unaccredited and/or fraudulent institutions (e.g. diploma mills);

4.	Commissioned Corp Officers in the Public Health Service are not considered “employees” as per Title 5 U.S.C. §2105, and therefore are ineligible to participate in the SLRP;

5.	If at any time the employee consolidates to a non-federally insured loan, then the employee will be ineligible for future payments on non-federally insured loans. (Note:  In these cases, the employee is not responsible for paying previous benefits already paid on federally insured loans, as long as they met all other terms of their service agreement).  

C.	The provisions of this Instruction pertaining to conditions of employment of bargaining unit employees are fully negotiable in accordance with 5 U.S.C. Chapter 71, and such actions require notification to labor organizations when impacted employees are bargaining unit employees.  When the provisions of this Instruction differ from the requirements contained in applicable collective bargaining agreement(s), the collective bargaining agreement takes precedence for bargaining unit employees.

537-1-30 	REFERENCES
 
A.	Public Law 106-398 amending 5 USC §5379

B.	5 United States Code, §5379 

C.	5 CFR, Part 537 

 

537-1-40	DEFINITIONS

A.	Federal Direct Student Loan.  The U. S. Department of Education is the lender for these loans. Direct Loans include Federal Direct PLUS loans and Federal Direct Stafford loans.

B.	Federal Family Education Loan Program.  These loans are insured by the Department of Education. Loans are privately issued by a bank, credit union, or other lender that participates in the Federal Family Education Loan Programs.

C.	Student Loan Repayment Program (SLRP).  The Federal SLRP permits agencies to repay Federally insured student loans as a recruitment or retention incentive for candidates or current employees of the agency.  The program implements 5 U.S.C. §5379, which authorizes agencies to set up their own student loan repayment programs to attract or retain highly qualified employees.

D.	Student Loan.  A loan made, insured, or guaranteed under parts B, D, or E of Title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965; or a health education assistance loan made or insured under Part A of Title VII of the Public Health Service Act, or under Part E of Title VIII of that Act.  Loans covered under The Higher Education Act include such loans as:

1.	Federal Stafford Loans, including Federal subsidized, Federal unsubsidized, direct subsidized, and direct unsubsidized loans;

2.	Federal Supplemental Loans for Students;

3.	Federal Plus Loans -- Federal and Direct Plus Loans;

4.	Federal Consolidation Loans -- direct subsidized and direct unsubsidized;

5.	Defense Loans made before July 1, 1972;

6.	National Direct Student Loans made between 7/1/72 and 7/1/87; and

7.	Federal Perkins Loans.

Loans covered under the Public Health Service Act include loans made under:

1.	The Nursing Student Loan Program;

2.	The Health Profession Student Loan Program; and

3.	The Health Education Assistance Loan Program.

E.	Subsidized Loan.  The U.S. Government pays the interest on the loan while the student is in school, during the 6-month grace period, and during periods of authorized deferment.

F.	Unsubsidized Loan.  The student is responsible for paying the interest accrued while the student is in school, during the 6-month grace period, and during authorized periods of deferment.




537-1-50	RESPONSIBILITIES

A.	HHS Assistant Secretary for Administration, Office of Human Resources (ASA/OHR):

1.	Develops Department-wide human resources guidance and policy consistent with HHS and Office of Personnel Management (OPM) policy, procedures and all applicable federal laws and regulations.

2.	Periodically reviews Operating Division and Staff Division procedures, actions, and reports to assure conformance with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations. Required.

B.	OpDiv/StaffDiv Human Resource Offices:

1.	Comply with this Instruction, any HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.

2.	Funding.  Each OpDiv is responsible for funding its own student loan repayment program, and certification of funds must be obtained according to established StaffDiv budgetary procedures.

3.	Ensure that managers, supervisors and personnel involved in the competitive hiring process are trained and informed of merit systems principles and prohibited personnel practices.  

4.	Ensure that responsibilities under any applicable labor relations statues and union agreements are fulfilled.

5.	Prepare the written justification for requesting use of the SLRP.

6.	Each OpDiv will designate a SLRP coordinator responsible for:

a.	Developing and disseminating operating procedures governing the OpDiv’s use of the Department’s Student Loan Repayment Program;

b.	Providing updates when changes are made to the laws governing the student loan repayment program;

c.	Consolidating OpDiv input for reporting purposes;

d.	Ensuring verification that the student loan is federally insured and loan balance before payment is authorized;

e.	Coordinating with lending institution(s); and

f.	Coordinating with the servicing Human Resources Center, and payroll function.  

7.	Program Controls.  Employees may have both eligible and ineligible loans from the same lending institution.  Therefore, OPDIV’s will institute follow-up procedures with lenders to ensure that payments are made correctly and only to eligible loans.

8.	OPDIV’s will track participants to ensure that service agreements are fulfilled, and recoupment 
procedures will be initiated when a service agreement is not met unless a waiver is requested 


and approved. (See Appendix 4).

9.	OPDIV’s will review participants’ loan balances annually to ensure employees are paying his/her share of the debt before any additional SLRP is made on the employee’s behalf.

10.	OPDIV’s will confirm participants’ performance appraisal prior to each payment.  (Employees must maintain the equivalent of a “fully successful” performance appraisal to receive SLRP benefits.)  

11.	The repayment of a student loan is taxable wages.  OPDIVs/OHROs are responsible for ensuring that tax withholdings are deducted at the time payment is made, e.g., federal income tax, FICA, Medicare withholding, and any applicable state or local income tax.  

C.	Employees:

1.	The employee is responsible for making payments on the portion of the loan not covered by the HHS SLRP.  The employee also is responsible for any income tax obligation resulting from the student loan repayment benefit. 

2.	Fulfilling the requirements of the service agreement.

3.	Responsible for providing adequate documentation of the nature of the loan and its balance.

4.	Payments are made in a single lump sum directly to the financial institution holding the loan, and the employee must obtain a statement from the financial institution stating that the loan is made, insured, or guaranteed under one of the following:  parts B, D or E of Title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965; or a health education assistance loan made or insured under part A of Title VII of the Public Health Service Act or under part E of Title VIII of that Act.  Verification that the loan is current (not past due), the loan number, financial institution routing number for electronic transfer of funds (if available) and the payoff amount as of a specific date should be referenced on the statement as well.

537-1-60	POLICY

A.	Maximum Repayment Amount.  Eligible employees may be considered for loan repayment assistance up to $10,000 per calendar year, with a $60,000 lifetime maximum for any individual.  Individual loan repayments are made on an annual basis and more than one loan may be repaid so long as the combined repayments do not exceed the annual and lifetime limits.  SLRP may be authorized for recruitment or retention purposes.

B.	Recruitment.  

1.	Loan repayment may be authorized upon the determination that, in the absence of loan repayment benefits, the Operating Division (OPDIV) would have difficulty filling a position with a highly qualified candidate.  Evidence of need may be based on: 

a.	The success of recent efforts to recruit suitable candidates for similar positions, including such indicators as offer acceptance rates, the proportion of positions filled, and the length of 
time required to fill positions.


b.	Recent turnover in the same or similar positions.

c.	Labor market factors that affect the ability to recruit for similar positions.

d.	Need to fill position requiring highly specialized skills or qualifications.

2.	OPDIV managerial staff may consider the following criteria in determining the amount of the Student Loan Repayment:

a.	The severity of the recruiting problem.

b.	Salary levels reported in published salary surveys for comparable non-Federal positions.

c.	The criticality of the position to be filled and the effect on the OPDIV if it is not filled or if there is a delay in filling it.

d.	Current salary of the candidate.

e.	Salary documented in a competing job offer (if available).

f.	The disparity in cost-of-living between the candidate's current residence and the proposed duty station.

g.	The projected cost of further recruitment efforts if the candidate does not accept the position.

h.	The extent of the individual's past training and experience that serves to qualify him/her for the position.

i.	Budget availability.

3.	Each determination for recruitment purposes (including the amount to be paid) must be made 
before the employee enters on duty.  The SLRP may not be used to recruit an individual from another Federal agency.

C.	Retention.  

1.	In a case where the employee is likely to leave the agency for employment outside the Federal service and it’s essential to retain the employee based on the employee’s high or unique qualifications or a special need of the OPDIV.  Evidence of need may be based on:

a.	The unique or high qualifications of the employee or the special need for the employee’s skills that makes it essential to retain him/her.

b.	The extent to which the employee’s departure would affect the OPDIV's ability to carry out an activity or perform a function that is deemed essential to the Agency’s mission.

2.	OPDIV managerial staff may consider the following criteria in deciding the amount of the Student Loan Repayment:

a.	Salary levels reported in published salary surveys for comparable non-Federal positions.


b.	Salary documented in a competing job offer (if available).

c.	The criticality of the position and the effect on the OPDIV if the employee were to leave.

d.	The projected cost of recruitment and training associated with replacement of the employee.

e.	Employee’s tenure with the OPDIV.

f.	Budget availability.

D.	Requests for Student Loan Repayment.  

1.	OPDIV managers/supervisors recommending an employee for a SLRP must document in writing each approval of student loan repayment benefits.  The written determination must show the employee (or job candidate) meets the criteria specified in paragraphs B or C above. An authorized official must approve SLRP in connection with a recruitment action before the job candidate actually enters on duty in the position for which he or she was recruited.

2.	OPDIV managers/supervisors must review the “Request for Student Loan Repayment Program Under the Student Loan Repayment Program” document (see Appendix 1).  Appendix 1 should be filled out each year the employee is receiving SLRP.  Each year (if applicable), the OPDIV circles the corresponding year under “Student Loan Repayment Benefit for Year Number,” and update the other information.  Further, OPDIV must have employees sign a service agreement (see paragraph E below) and Appendix 3, “Student Loan Repayment Program, Outstanding Loan Information Request.”

E.	Service Agreements

1.	Before a loan repayment may be made, the employee must sign a Student Loan Repayment Program Service Agreement (see Appendix 2) acknowledging the requirement to serve a 
minimum of three years with the OPDIV, regardless of the amount of repayment authorized.  This three-year period commences at the beginning effective date specified in the service agreement.  The commencement date shall not be (1) earlier than the date the service agreement is signed by the approving official; or (2) earlier than the date the individual begins serving in the position for which he or she was recruited, if SLRP is being approved to recruit a job candidate.  Any additional repayments made during this three-year period do not extend the service agreement.  However, if additional payments are made after the initial three-year agreement has been completed, the service agreement will be extended by one year for each payment made beyond the 3rd year.  The extended service agreement period begins when the first payment beyond the 3rd year is made to the holder of the loan.  

2.	The agreement may also specify employment conditions considered appropriate, e.g., employee’s position and the duties he/she is expected to perform, work schedule, or expected level of performance.  The service agreement in no way constitutes a right, promise, or 
entitlement for continued employment or noncompetitive conversion to the competitive service, nor does it limit management’s right to take corrective or disciplinary actions as otherwise appropriate.     

3.	Periods of leave without pay, or other periods during which the employee is not in a pay status, do not count toward completion of the required service period.  Thus, the service completion date must be extended by the total amount of time spent in non-pay status.  However, as 

provided by 5 CFR 353.107, absence because of uniformed service or compensable injury is considered creditable toward the required service period upon reemployment.

4.	An employee who voluntarily leaves the OPDIV or is separated involuntarily because of performance, misconduct, or a negative suitability determination under 5 CFR part 731 and fails to complete the agreed-upon period of service must refund the full amount of benefits received during the initial three-year period.  Employees who fail to complete the period of service under an extension period, (e.g., 4th year, 5th year) must repay the amount of the benefits received in the extension year only.  If an employee fails to reimburse the OPDIV, the amount outstanding will be recovered from the employee under established debt collection procedures.

F.	Approval of Student Loan Payments

1.	Approval for student loan repayments will be made in accordance with established OPDIV operating procedures.

G.	Termination of Benefits

1.	An employee receiving loan repayment benefits will be ineligible for continued benefits if he/she separates from the OPDIV for any reason; fails to maintain a fully satisfactory level of performance; or violates any of the conditions of the service agreement.  

2.	The SLRP is only for federally insured loans.  If at any time the employee consolidates to a non-federally insured loan, then the employee will be ineligible for future payments on non-federally insured loans. (Note:  the employee is not responsible for paying back previous benefits already paid on federally insured loans as long as all other conditions of the service agreement were met).

H.	Waiver of Student Loan Indebtedness

1.	Repayment of student loan indebtedness may be wholly or partially waived at the discretion of the OPDIV repaying the loan if recovery would be against equity and good conscience or against the public interest.  In making the determination, the OPDIV will take into account consistency, fairness, and the cost to the taxpayer of recovering monies owed to the government.  Employees who meet the criteria for a waiver of their student loan indebtedness must:

a.	Complete a Waiver of Student Loan Indebtedness Information Request document (Appendix 4);   

b.	Attach original Service Agreement (Appendix 2), along with the loan balance from the lending institution, and written justification as to why recovery of the debt would be against equity, good conscience, and the public interest; and

c.	The documents will then be forwarded to the OPDIV approving official for final approval according to OPDIV operating procedures.   

2.	If the waiver request is approved, the Payroll Office will suspend collection of the debt; a personnel action will be generated by the servicing Human Resources Center to terminate the debt collection, and the employee and his/her supervisor will receive written notification from the OPDIV approving official that the debt has been suspended. 


3.	When an employee is separated by death or disability retirement or is unable to continue working because of disability evidenced by acceptable medical documentation, repayment is automatically waived.

537-1-70	DOCUMENTATION, REPORTING, AND ACCOUNTABILITY
A.	Records associated with personnel actions, including all documentation sufficient for third party reconstruction purposes, must be retained according to the record disposition schedule.  Generally, records created in a given year must be retained for a total of three (3) full years.  

B.	Records involved in litigation and grievance processes may be destroyed only after official notification is received from OPM, Department of Justice, courts, or the Office of the General Counsel, etc. that the matter has been fully litigated, or resolved and closed.

C.	ASA/OHR may conduct periodic accountability reviews to analyze compliance with this Instruction, HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and applicable federal laws and regulations.

D.	On or before March 31 each year, the ASA/OHR will submit to OPM a report of the Department’s use of the SLRP authority during the previous calendar year.  The report shall include: (1) the number of employees who received SLRP benefits; (2) the job classifications of the recipients (i.e., pay plan, occupational series, and job title); and (3) the cost to the Department for SLRP. 




























550-1
550-1-00     PURPOSE

The purpose of this policy is to state Departmental policies and provide guidance concerning premium pay. Premium pay supplements base pay for work performed as stipulated in this policy. 

550-1-10         REFERENCES

A.	5 USC, Chapter 55, Subchapter V (Premium Pay)
B.	5 USC, Chapter 61, Subchapter II (Flexible and Compressed Work Schedules)
C.	5 CFR, Part 550 [Pay Administration (General)  Subpart A – Premium Pay]
D.	5 CFR, Part 550 [Pay Administration (General)  Subpart I – Pay for Duty Involving Physical Hardship or Hazard]
E.	5 CFR, Part 551 (Pay Administration under the Fair Labor Standards Act)
F.	5 CFR, Part 610 (Hours of Duty)
G.	Fathauer v. United States, 566 F.3d 1352 (Fed. Cir. 2009)
H.	HHS Guide to Timekeeping 
I.	HHS collective bargaining agreements


550-1-20	COVERAGE AND EXCLUSIONS

A.	Coverage
	This policy covers those persons defined as employees under 5 USC, Section 5541(2) including General Schedule (GS) employees.  

B.	Exclusions
	This policy does not apply to the following employees:
1.	GS, GP, or GR employees compensated under Title 38;
2.	Firefighters entitled to Fire Fighters Premium Pay;
3.	Federal Wage System employees;
4.	Senior Executive Service;
5.	Student Stipend employees
Note:  Policies governing compensatory time for religious observances and compensatory time off for travel are excluded from this Instruction.

550-1-30         GENERAL DEFINITIONS

A.	Administrative workweek. Any period of seven consecutive days (most typically Sunday through Saturday) designated in advance by the head of the OPDIV.
B.	Administratively uncontrollable work. See Section 550-1-70.A.
C.	Biweekly Pay Limitation. A cap on basic and premium pay during a pay period limiting pay to the greater of the biweekly rate payable for (1) GS-15, step 10 (including any applicable locality payment or special rate supplement), or (2) the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule; whichever is greater.
D.	Call-Back Overtime. See Section 550-1-50.C.
E.	Compensatory Time Off. See Section 550-1-50.B.
F.	Criminal Investigator. A Criminal Investigator is a law enforcement officer whose position is properly classified under either the GS-1811 or the GS-1812 series in the General Schedule classification system.
G.	Duty involving physical hardship. Duty that may not in itself be hazardous, but causes extreme physical discomfort or distress and is not adequately alleviated by protective or mechanical devices. Physical hardship duties may involve exposure to extreme temperatures for a long period of time, arduous physical exertion, or exposure to fumes, dust, or noise that causes nausea, skin, eye, ear, or nose irritation.
H.	FLSA exempt/non-exempt employee.  The Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938, as amended, provides minimum standards for both wages and overtime entitlements and administrative procedures by which covered worktime must be compensated.  Employees are designated as FLSA exempt or non-exempt.  FLSA exempt means that the employee is not covered by the minimum wage and overtime provisions of the Act, while FLSA non-exempt means that the employee is covered by those provisions of the Act.  More information can be found in 5 CFR, Part 551, Subpart B.
I.	Hazardous duty. Duty performed under circumstances in which an accident could result in serious injury or death, such as duty performed on a high structure where protective facilities are not used or on an open structure where adverse conditions such as darkness, lightning, steady rain, or high wind velocity exist.
J.	Hazard pay differential. See Section 550-1-90.A.
K.	Holiday Premium Pay. See Section 550-1-80.B. 
L.	Irregular or occasional overtime work. Overtime work that is not part of an employee's regularly scheduled administrative workweek. 
M.	Law Enforcement Availability Pay.  See Section 550-1-100.A.
N.	Night Pay Differential. See Section 550-1-80.A.
O.	Overtime. See Section 550-1-50.A.
P.	Physical hardship. Duty that may not in itself be hazardous, but causes extreme physical discomfort or distress and is not adequately alleviated by protective or mechanical devices, such as duty involving exposure to extreme temperatures for a long period of time, arduous physical exertion, or exposure to fumes, dust, or noise that causes nausea, skin, eye, ear, or nose irritation.
Q.	Premium Pay. The dollar value of earned hours of compensatory time off and additional pay authorized by the relevant statute and regulation for overtime, night, Sunday or holiday work; or for standby duty, administratively uncontrollable overtime work, or availability duty. This excludes overtime pay paid to Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) non-exempt employees and compensatory time off earned in lieu of such overtime pay.
R.	Preshift and Postshift Activity. See Section 550-1-50.D.
S.	Regular overtime work. Overtime work that is part of an employee's regularly scheduled administrative workweek.
T.	Regularly scheduled administrative workweek. The period within an administrative workweek during which the employee (including full-time and part-time) is regularly scheduled to work.  
U.	Regularly scheduled standby duty pay. See Section 550-1-60.A.
V.	Regularly scheduled work. Work that is scheduled in advance of an administrative workweek for purposes of establishing workweeks. The 40 hour work schedule and flexible or compressed work schedules are typical pre-scheduled work tours of duty. All work performed by an employee within the pre-scheduled work tour of duty is considered regularly scheduled work for premium pay and hours of duty purposes.
W.	Sunday Premium Pay. See Section 550-1-80.C.
X.	Tour of Duty.  The hours of a day (a daily tour of duty) and the days of an administrative workweek (a weekly tour of duty) that constitute an employee’s regularly scheduled administrative workweek.
Y.	Unscheduled Duty Hours. For the purposes of availability pay, unscheduled duty hours are those hours, during which a criminal investigator performs work, or is determined by the employing agency to be available for work, that are not: 
1.	Part of the 40 hour basic workweek of the investigator, or
2.	Regularly scheduled compensated overtime hours that were scheduled in advance of the investigator’s administrative workweek.
550-1-40 	RESPONSIBILITIES
A.	Office of Human Resources (OHR), Assistant Secretary for Administration (ASA), is responsible for:
1.	Updating and maintaining this policy;
2.	Advising operating Human Resources organizations on the administration of premium pay;
3.	Coordinating HHS reports to the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on the administration of premium pay;
4.	Reviewing OPDIV requests for exceptions to premium pay regulations; and
5.	Upon concurrence, forwarding such requests to OPM for official authorization for exceptions to premium pay regulations. 
B.	Operating Divisions (OPDIVs) are responsible for:
1.	Ensuring the compliance of the requirements of this policy within their respective organizations;
2.	Determining when a situation is an emergency which poses a direct threat to life or property; 
3.	Establishing a process to ensure that all requirements for authorizing premium pay are properly approved, recorded, and documented. Documentation must be maintained with time and attendance data for six years; and
4.	Submitting to Operating Human Resources organizations requests for exceptions to premium pay guidance.
C.	Operating Human Resources organizations (OHROs) are responsible for:
1.	Advising OPDIVs on the use of premium pay;
2.	Calculating the proper amounts for premium pay;
3.	Making determinations regarding the applicability and qualifications of specific situations and employees for hazard pay eligibility; and
4.	Reviewing OPDIV requests for exceptions to Premium Pay guidance and forwarding for consideration, when appropriate, to OHR. 
D.	Supervisors are responsible for considering and documenting their approval in advance, overtime work, compensatory time, and all other work resulting in premium pay compensation.
E.	Timekeepers are responsible for recording, documenting, and maintaining overtime usage records along with time and attendance data for six years.

550-1-50 	Overtime, Compensatory Time Off, Call-Back Overtime, Preshift and 
Postshift Activity

A.	Overtime. Overtime is work approved or officially ordered, and performed by an employee in excess of 8 hours a day or in excess of 40 hours in an administrative workweek.  
1.	The following are exceptions to the above rule:
a.	Employees who are authorized to work compressed workweeks receive overtime pay for work in excess of those specified hours that constitute the compressed schedule (i.e., over 8 hours if their scheduled day is an 8 hour day, over 9 hours if their scheduled day is a 9 hour day).
b.	Employees authorized to work flexible schedules and for whom credit hours are applicable receive overtime pay only for hours which are not credit hours.
2.	Overtime Pay. For employees with rates of basic pay equal to or less than the rate of basic pay for GS-10, step 1, the overtime hourly rate is the employee’s hourly rate of basic pay multiplied by 1.5. For employees with rates of basic pay greater than the basic pay for GS-10, step 1, the overtime hourly rate is the greater of (a) the hourly rate of basic pay for GS-10, step 1, multiplied by 1.5, or (b) the employee’s hourly rate of basic pay.
3.	Employees may not be compensated for overtime unless the work is authorized both in advance and in writing. In emergencies, employees may be ordered to work overtime without prior approval, provided approval is documented the next workday.
4.	For employees on non-reimbursable details outside the Department, OPDIVs must ensure that a clear understanding exists with the gaining organization with respect to when overtime may be worked and whether the cost of any overtime will be reimbursed.

B.	Compensatory Time Off. Compensatory time off is time off with pay in lieu of overtime pay for irregular or occasional overtime work; or, when permitted under agency flexible work schedule programs, time off with pay in lieu of overtime pay for regularly scheduled or irregular or occasional overtime work.
1.	At the request of an employee (FLSA exempt or non-exempt), the employee may be granted compensatory time off in lieu of irregular or occasional overtime work.
2.	Under an agency’s flexible work schedule program, at the request of an employee, the employee may be granted compensatory time off in lieu of an equal amount of overtime work, whether or not irregular or occasional in nature.
3.	Agencies may require that an FLSA exempt employee whose basic rate of pay exceeds GS-10, step 10 (including locality pay and any applicable special rate under 5 U.S.C. 5305) receive compensatory time off in lieu of overtime pay for irregular or occasional overtime work.
4.	An employee must use accrued compensatory time off by the end of the 26th pay period after the pay period during which it was earned. 
5.	If accrued compensatory time off is not used by an employee within 26 pay periods, the employee must be paid for the earned compensatory time off.
6.	If an employee separates from Federal service, transfers to another Federal agency, or is placed in a leave without pay status due to performance of duties in a uniformed service or due to an on-the-job injury before the expiration of the 26 pay period time limit, the employee must be paid for the earned compensatory time off.
7.	Compensatory time is subject to the same maximum pay limitation as is overtime (see Section 550-1-110 E.)
8.	The dollar value of compensatory time off when it is paid, or for the purpose of applying pay limitations, is the amount of overtime pay the employee otherwise would have received for the hours of the pay period during which compensatory time off was earned by performing overtime work.
  
C.	Call-Back Overtime. Call-back overtime occurs when employees are required to return to work after leaving the work site or to perform overtime work on a day for which they are not scheduled to work.
1.	A minimum of two hours overtime is credited, even though the employee may perform no work after returning to the work site. It is possible to have several call-backs in a 24-hour period. Each call-back is individually payable until the aggregate pay for FLSA exempt employees totals the biweekly pay limitation. (There is no maximum pay limit for FLSA non-exempt and wage grade employees.)
2.	Because call-back work is irregular/occasional overtime work, compensatory time off may be substituted for overtime pay at the employee's request. The employee receives a minimum of two hours compensatory time per call-back.
3.	Call-backs on a holiday are paid at the holiday rate for hours which correspond to the employee's regularly scheduled work time. Outside these hours, call-backs are paid at the authorized overtime rate of pay.  
D.	Preshift and Postshift Activity. Preshift activity is a preparatory activity an employee performs prior to the commencement of the employee’s principal activities. Postshift activity is a concluding activity an employee performs after the completion of the employee’s principal activities.
Employees who perform preshift or postshift activities outside their daily scheduled tour of duty must be compensated with irregular or occasional overtime, if all of the following criteria are met:
1.	The preshift or postshift activity is closely related to the employee’s principal activities and is indispensable in the performance of the principal activities;
2.	The preshift or postshift activity requires a time of more than 10 minutes (i.e., at least 11 minutes) per daily tour; and
3.	The time period for the preshift or postshift activity has to be scheduled by an official with authority to approve irregular or occasional overtime. The overtime credited must not exceed the time scheduled.

550-1-60 	REGULARLY SCHEDULED STANDBY DUTY PAY

A.	Regularly scheduled standby duty pay is approved premium pay on an annual basis for an employee in lieu of regularly scheduled overtime, night, holiday, and Sunday pay. It is sometimes referred to as standby duty premium pay, standby premium pay, or standby pay.
B.	Standby duty premium pay is appropriate when an employee is required to remain at, or within the confines of, a duty station longer than ordinary periods of duty, a substantial part of which consists of remaining in a standby status rather than performing work. Standby duty includes periods of time during which no work is performed while the employee is waiting for an event to occur which will require his/her attention.  The pay covers both non-work and work times.  In contrast, employees who are "on call" are paid only when they perform work; if called to work, they receive call-back overtime.
C.	Standby duty pay may be paid at a rate between 5% and 25% (as determined in accordance with the requirements in 5 CFR 550.144) of that part of the employee’s rate of basic pay which does not exceed the minimum rate of basic pay for GS-10 (including any applicable locality pay or special rate of pay under 5 U.S.C. 5305 or similar provision of law). Because standby duty pay is premium pay, it is subject to the biweekly maximum limitation on premium pay. 
D.	Standby duty is associated with an employee's regularly assigned duties. The hours during which standby duty is required must be included in the employee’s tour of duty.  This tour of duty must be established on a regularly recurring basis over a substantial period of time.  The result is that standby pay becomes basic pay and the extra pay earned is creditable for retirement and life insurance purposes only; it is not basic pay for overtime purposes. Because of this effect, OHROs must issue a Standard Form 50, Notification of Personnel Action, for every employee authorized regularly scheduled standby pay.
E.	Premium pay for standby duty is in lieu of all other premium pay, including regularly scheduled overtime, holiday pay, night pay differential, and Sunday premium pay.  However, standby duty pay is not in lieu of irregular or occasional overtime that is authorized and ordered in excess of the regularly scheduled standby duty.  Employees on standby duty may be paid overtime or receive compensatory time for irregular or occasional overtime work.
F.	An employee whose standby duty includes a holiday is still on standby duty during the holiday. The employee must be excused from work on the holiday when he/she is not needed that day. If the employee is absent during the holiday and has not been excused because (s)he is not needed that day, the employee must be charged annual leave, sick leave, leave without pay, or absence without leave, as appropriate.

550-1-70 	PAY FOR ADMINISTRATIVELY UNCONTROLLABLE WORK

A.	Administratively uncontrollable work (AUW) is work in which the hours of duty cannot be controlled administratively and which requires substantial amounts of irregular or occasional overtime work, with the employee generally being responsible for recognizing, without supervision, circumstances which require the employee to remain on duty.
B.	AUW is paid on an annual basis determined by a percentage of the employee’s rate of basic pay and the average number of hours a week of irregular or occasional overtime work. Premium pay is determined as an appropriate percentage, not less than 10 percent nor more than 25 percent, of the employee’s rate of basic pay.

550-1-80 	NIGHT PAY DIFFERENTIAL, HOLIDAY PAY, SUNDAY PAY

A.	Night Pay Differential is pay for nightwork. Nightwork is regularly scheduled work performed by an employee between the hours of 6 p.m. and 6 a.m.  Except as otherwise provided in this section, an employee who performs nightwork is entitled to pay for that work at his or her rate of basic pay plus a night pay differential amounting to 10 percent of his or her rate of basic pay..  
1.	Night pay differential for GS employees is 10 percent of their scheduled pay rate regardless of grade.  This pay differential is paid for any regularly scheduled work performed between    6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
2.	Night pay differential is paid in addition to overtime, Sunday, or holiday premium pay payable under this section and is not included in the rate of basic pay used to compute premium pay for Sunday work or premium pay for holiday work.  For FLSA exempt employees, night pay differential is not included in the rate of basic pay used to compute overtime pay.
3.	Care must be taken to distinguish between irregular or occasional overtime work at night and a temporary change in a daily tour of duty. An employee may be temporarily assigned to a daily tour of duty that includes night work. In this circumstance, the employee is entitled to a night pay differential, even when the scheduling of the assignment occurs within the administrative workweek.
4.	An employee with a total amount of paid leave of eight hours or more during a pay period, day or night, cannot earn a night pay differential for that leave period.
5.	By definition, intermittent employees work on an irregular or occasional basis without a prearranged work schedule.  As a result, these employees are not eligible for night pay differential.
6.	Night pay differential is not paid to an employee on a flexible work schedule solely because the employee elects a time of arrival or departure at a time when night pay is authorized.  However, General Schedule (GS) employees must be paid night pay for those hours that must be worked between 6 p.m. and 6 a.m. to complete an 8-hour tour of duty.  GS employees must also be paid night pay for all designated core hours worked between 6 p.m. and 6 a.m. and for any regularly scheduled overtime work between those hours.
B.	Holiday Premium Pay. Holiday Pay is pay for work performed on a holiday during hours which correspond to regularly scheduled hours of duty.
1.	Double time is the basic pay normally received for the holiday. Overtime work performed in excess of eight hours on a holiday is paid on the basis of time and one-half for full-time employees in accordance with 5 U.S.C. § 5542(a). An employee who is required to report for work on a holiday is paid for at least two hours, whether or not work is actually performed.
2.	Employees on fixed compressed schedules receive pay for work on a holiday not to exceed the number of hours of the compressed work schedule for that day. Hours in excess of scheduled work requirements for that day are paid at the overtime pay rate and in accordance with overtime pay rules. Employees on flexible schedules may not receive holiday pay for more than eight hours.
3.	Pay for work on a holiday for part-time employees is applicable only to their regularly scheduled tour of duty for the day on which the holiday occurs, provided that day is one of their scheduled work days. Work in excess of the employees scheduled tour of duty is paid at the basic rate, not to exceed eight hours. Work in excess of eight hours is paid at the overtime rate of pay.  Part-time employees do not receive holiday premium pay for work performed on an “in lieu of” holiday for full-time employees.
4.	All holiday work must be approved in advance and in writing. Each OPDIV is required to ensure that holiday premium pay (like overtime) is properly approved, recorded, and documented. Documentation must be maintained with time and attendance data for six years.
5.	Premium pay for holiday work is in addition to overtime pay or night pay differential, or premium pay for Sunday work payable under this section and is not included in the rate of basic pay used to compute the night pay differential or premium pay for Sunday work.  For FLSA exempt employees, premium pay for holiday work is not included in the rate of basic pay used to compute overtime pay.
C.	Sunday Premium Pay. Sunday premium pay (also referred to as Sunday pay differential) is paid to employees for non-overtime, regularly scheduled work when any part of that daily tour of duty is on a Sunday. Sunday premium pay is not authorized for intermittent employees.   
1.	A full-time or part-time employee is entitled to pay at his or her rate of basic pay plus premium pay at a rate equal to 25 percent of his or her rate of basic pay for each hour of Sunday work.
2.	Sunday must be a part of the employee's regularly scheduled tour in order for the employee to receive Sunday premium pay.
3.	Employees may not be paid Sunday premium pay for hours when the employee is on leave.  Section 624 of the Treasury and General Government Appropriations Act, 1999, provides that no funds shall be available for paying Sunday premium pay to any employee unless the employee actually performed work during the time corresponding to such premium pay.  This restriction on the payment of Sunday premium pay for employees who do not actually perform work on Sunday includes General Schedule and prevailing rate (wage) employees. The restriction is no longer limited to funding from appropriations Acts, but applies to funding from any Act.
4.	An employee is not entitled to Sunday premium pay while engaged in training, except when the employee is given training during a period of duty for which he or she is already receiving premium pay. This exception does not apply to an employee assigned to full-time training at institutions of higher learning.
5.	Sunday premium pay is not paid for overtime hours, only for the regularly scheduled tour hours. Sunday premium pay hours begin at 12:01 a.m., Sunday morning, and continue until 12 midnight, Sunday night. If an employee's regular schedule starts at 12:01 a.m. Monday, that employee does not earn Sunday premium pay. If any part of the daily tour of duty falls on Sunday, the entire tour for that day is considered to be Sunday work. For example, if an employee works 8 hours during a basic tour of duty that begins on Saturday and ends on Sunday, and also works 8 hours during a basic tour of duty that begins on the same Sunday and ends on Monday, the employee is entitled to 16 hours of Sunday premium pay.
6.	Premium pay for Sunday work is in addition to overtime pay, premium pay for holiday work, or night pay differential payable under this section and is not included in the rate of basic pay used to compute premium pay for holiday work or night pay differential.  For FLSA exempt employees, premium pay for Sunday work is not included in the rate of basic pay used to compute overtime pay.

550-1-90     HAZARDOUS PAY DIFFERENTIAL

A.	Hazardous pay differential. Hazardous pay differential is additional pay for the performance of hazardous duty and duty involving physical hardship. Efforts to avoid and protect employees from such hazards, physical hardships, or working conditions are of utmost priority. Pay differential should only be made where such exposure is unavoidable.
B.	Hazardous pay differential may not be more than 25 percent of the employee’s rate of basic pay. OHROs are responsible for making determinations regarding whether specific situations and the employee qualify for hazard pay differential. Determinations should be based on the position and justified in the evaluation statement. If the issue is not addressed in the documentation, the presumption is that hazardous duty pay is payable. Employee entitlement is recorded on the SF-50B, Notification of Personnel Action.
C.	Requests to designate additional hazardous duty exposure situations other than those identified in 5 CFR 550, Appendix A, Subpart I, should be submitted by the OPDIV Head through their OHRO for ASA/OHR endorsement prior to submission to OPM for approval.

550-1-100   LAW ENFORCEMENT AVAILABILITY PAY

A.	Law Enforcement Availability Pay. Law Enforcement Availability Pay (LEAP) is pay to compensate criminal investigators for unscheduled duty in excess of the 40 hour workweek based on the needs of the employing agency. It is paid only for periods of time during which the criminal investigator receives basic pay. LEAP is the lesser of: 
1.	Twenty (25%) percent of an employee’s basic rate of pay; or
2.	The biweekly pay limitation.

B.	LEAP is paid on an annual premium pay basis in lieu of standby duty pay, administratively uncontrollable overtime pay, and irregular or occasional overtime pay. Criminal investigators receiving LEAP may earn overtime pay for regularly scheduled overtime, excluding the first two hours of overtime work on any regular workday.
C.	The criminal investigator must meet the “substantial hours requirement” which is an annual average number of hours of unscheduled duty per regular workday of two hours or more. Unscheduled duty hours include hours not part of the 40 hour basic workweek of the criminal investigator and not a part of compensated regularly scheduled overtime hours.
D.	The criminal investigator must be determined to be generally and reasonably accessible to perform unscheduled duty based on the needs of the OPDIV. The criminal investigator and the supervisor must annually certify that he/she currently meets, and is expected to continue to meet, the “substantial hours” requirement.
550-1-110  	 PAY LIMITATIONS
A.	Biweekly pay. Biweekly pay is limited by the amount of premium pay that can be paid during a biweekly pay period. Premium pay cannot be paid to General Schedule employees (including law enforcement officers and other covered employees) which would cause an employee’s basic pay, overtime pay, the dollar value of compensatory time off, night pay, annual premium pay, Sunday premium pay, and holiday premium pay to exceed the greater of the biweekly rate for:
1.	GS-15, step 10 (including any applicable special salary rate or locality rate of pay); 
or 
2.	Level V of the Executive Schedule. 
B.	Emergency situations. The limitation for a pay period may be exceeded in emergency situations which pose a direct threat to life or property. OPDIVs have the authority to make emergency determinations. Even when an emergency determination is made, the annual maximum earnings limitation cannot exceed the greater of the annual rate (1) for a GS-15 (including any applicable locality payment or special rate supplement), or (2) for level V of the Executive Schedule in effect on the last day of the calendar year.
C.	Other.  The following types of premium pay remain subject to a biweekly limitation when other premium payments are subject to an annual limitation:
1.	Standby duty pay;
2.	Administratively uncontrollable overtime pay;
3.	Availability pay for criminal investigators
D.	Law enforcement officers. The maximum limitation is either 150 percent of the minimum rate for GS-15 or the rate for Level V of the Executive Schedule, whichever is less.
E.	Compensatory time. The biweekly pay limitation is also a ceiling on compensatory time off. Compensatory time off is merely an alternative form of payment for overtime work. An employee may not exceed the biweekly pay limitation by choosing compensatory time off as a substitute for monetary overtime pay.
1.	For FLSA-exempt employees, an employee's total biweekly pay (the basic pay plus premium pay, plus the compensatory hours earned, plus the compensatory hours balance already accrued which was carried over) cannot exceed the greater of the biweekly rate (1) for a GS-15, step 10 (including any applicable locality payment or special rate supplement), or (2) for level V of the Executive Schedule.
2.	At no time may the number of compensatory hours accumulate beyond the number that would allow the FLSA-exempt employee's biweekly pay to equal that of a GS-15, Step 10, employee. For FLSA non-exempt employees, the dollar value of compensatory time off when it is liquidated, or for the purpose of applying pay limitations, is the amount of overtime pay the employee otherwise would have received for the hours of the pay period during which compensatory time off was earned by performing overtime work.
550-1-120    DOCUMENTATION AND ACCOUNTABILITY

A.	Documentation

1.	For employees on non-reimbursable details outside the Department, OPDIVs must provide written documentation to the gaining organization regarding when overtime may be worked and whether the cost of any overtime will be reimbursed.
2.	Each OPDIV is required to ensure that premium pay is properly approved, recorded, and documented. Documentation must be maintained with time and attendance data for six years.
3.	Each OPDIV must maintain documentation of all determinations of emergency situations.
4.	OHROs must issue a Standard Form 50, Notification of Personnel Action, for employees authorized premium pay related to regularly scheduled standby pay, administratively uncontrollable work, and hazardous duty pay.  
5.	Supervisors will document all authorized overtime, holiday work, and standby pay in advance and in writing. All emergency work which is approved must be documented the next work day.

B.	Accountability
The OHR, OHRO, and OPDIV will conduct such oversight activities as required to ensure that premium pay is administered in accordance with law, regulations, and HHS policy and procedures.






















550-3
550-3-00	PURPOSE 
This Instruction promulgates Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) policy on Compensatory Time Off for Travel (CTT) earned by employees for time spent in a travel status away from an employee’s official duty station when such time is not otherwise compensable.

 550-3-10	COVERAGE AND EXCLUSIONS
A.	Coverage
The provisions of this Instruction apply to all employees (without regard to whether the employee is exempt from or covered by the overtime pay provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) of 1938, as amended) who are not otherwise excluded in 5 CFR 550.101(a).   This also includes employees in senior-level (SL), scientific or professional (ST) positions and employees appointed under Title 42 authority. 
B.	Exclusions
Members of the Senior Executive Service (SES), physicians, dentists, and other similarly situated employees are excluded. Intermittent employees are not eligible to earn and use compensatory time off for travel because they do not have a scheduled tour of duty for leave purposes.  

Note:  When provisions of a negotiated labor management agreement differ from the procedures in this policy, the agreement takes precedence for those employees covered by it.  

550-3-20	REFERENCES
A.	5 USC § 5550b (Compensatory Time Off for Travel)
B.	5 CFR 550, Subpart N (Compensatory Time Off for Travel)
C.	5 CFR 530, Subpart B (Aggregate Limitation on Pay)
D.	HHS Instruction 590-1, Physicians and Dentist Pay (Title 38)
E.         HHS Guide for Timekeeping Handbook

550-3-30	DEFINITIONS
A.	Compensable – Periods of time creditable as hours of work for the purpose of determining a specific pay entitlement.
B.	Creditable Travel – Travel for work purposes that is officially authorized and approved by an organization’s designated approving official.   
C.	Approving Official – Operating Division (OPDIV) or designee; for example, an official authorized to sign Travel Authorizations (TAs).
D.	Official Duty Station (ODS) – The city, town, county, and state in which an employee works or the location of an employee’s worksite. The mileage radius is 50 miles to determine whether an employee’s travel is within or outside the limits of the employee’s official duty station for determining compensable travel time (overtime pay) for HHS employees.  
E.	Temporary duty station – A place where work is performed or place of abode while on temporary duty (TDY travel), such as a conference or meeting site, assigned worksite, office or hospital).  A temporary duty station, which is within a 50-mile radius of an employee’s permanent duty station is within the limits of an employee’s official duty station for overtime pay for travel purposes.
F.	Usual Waiting Time -  Up to two (2) hours prior to a domestic flight, up to three (3) hours prior to an international flight or 30 minutes prior to travel using other modes of transportation (bus, train, etc.).  Note:  Supervisors may adjust the foregoing times in unusual circumstances, (e.g., cancelled flights that require waiting in line to make alternate arrangements may be creditable as CTT for the extended waiting time).    

550-3-40	RESPONSIBILITIES
A.		Operating Division heads or designees are responsible for: 
1.	Ensuring travel is authorized and approved by an authorized management official.
2.	Determining the method(s) of travel and transportation most advantageous to the Government, considering cost and other relevant factors.  
3.	Ensuring travel is arranged so that the need for CTT is eliminated or minimized. However, if travel must be scheduled where an employee might be eligible for CTT the travel orders must reflect such eligibility.   
4.	Crediting CTT to eligible employees in accordance with this Instruction. CTT may not be advanced.
5.	Approving requests to use CTT in increments of one quarter hour (15 minutes).
6.	Ensuring CTT is properly approved, recorded, and documented separately from other forms of compensatory travel time, through the appropriate automated time and attendance system (e.g. Integrated Time and Attendance System (ITAS)) or manual process (See HHS Timekeeping Handbook).
7.	Establishing procedures to ensure that employees are notified in writing at least annually of the requirement to use all accrued CTT by the end of the 26th pay period after the pay period in which it was credited (not earned).   Employees are likewise responsible for requesting supervisory approval to use CTT.
8.	Ensuring that unused CTT is held in abeyance for an employee who separates, or is placed in a leave without pay status (LWOP), and returns following:  (1) Separation or LWOP to perform service in the uniformed services; (2) Return to service through the exercise of reemployment rights; or (3) Separation or LWOP due to an on-the-job injury.  Accordingly, the employee must be advised (upon return), in writing of the requirement to use all CTT by the end of the 26th pay period following the pay period in which he or she returns, or forfeit the CTT.
9.	 Approving exceptions to the requirements of this Instruction.
B.	    Employees are responsible for:
1.	Submitting appropriate written documentation requesting CTT within 5 work-days after  completing the travel and return to the official duty station as authorized on his/her Travel Authorization (TA) (See sample at Exhibit A).   Requests for exceptions to the 5 work-day deadline must be approved by the OPDIV head or designee.
2.	Providing written documentation supporting his/her eligibility for CTT, if CTT is not initially authorized and travel plans change to the extent that he/she becomes eligible.  
3.	Requesting that earned CTT be credited at the same time other travel related claims are submitted (normally 5 days after completion of travel; however local negotiated procedures may allow longer, e.g. 14 days).  
4.	Requesting permission from his/her supervisor to schedule the use of his/her accrued CTT in advance the same way other leave is scheduled;
5.	Scheduling and using all accrued CTT within 26 pay periods after it is credited (not earned)
C.   	Timekeepers are responsible for:
1.	Understanding the difference between the rules, regulations and record-keeping procedures for documenting usage of CTT versus compensable travel time under other legal authorities; and
2.	Maintaining pertinent CTT documentation for six (6) years after CTT is credited.

550-3-50	POLICY
A.	Creditable Travel Time.  Employees must be credited with CTT status if the employee is required to travel away from the official duty station and the travel time is not otherwise compensable hours of work under other legal authority.
B.	Travel Status
1.	Time in a travel status includes time an employee actually spends traveling between the official duty station and a temporary duty station or between two temporary duty stations and the “usual” waiting time that precedes or interrupts such travel.  There may be other circumstances in which travel time is compensable which should be examined and approved on a case basis by the appropriate OPDIV or designee. 
2.	Travel between home and a temporary duty station outside the limits of the employee’s official duty station is creditable as time in a travel status.  However, the normal home-to-work or work-to-home commuting time must be deducted from the creditable travel hours.
3.	In situations where employees are permitted to use an alternate mode of transportation other than the mode of transportation offered, or travel at a time or route other that the time or route selected by their organization, the lesser of the estimated time in a travel status or the actual time in a travel status must be credited.          
4.	For employees who are on multiple-day travel assignments who choose not to use temporary lodging at the temporary duty station and return home at night or on a weekend, only the travel from home to the temporary duty station on the first day and travel from the temporary duty station to home on the last day is qualifying as time in a travel status subject to the deduction of normal commuting time, unless an exception is approved by an authorized designated official.
However, employees may receive credit for travel to and from home on other days if the authorizing official in his or her discretion, determines that there is a net savings to the Government from reduced lodging costs considering the value of lost labor time attributable to CTT.   
5.	Travel time between home and a transportation terminal (e.g., airport or train station, etc.) outside the limits of an employee’s official duty station and outside his/her regular working hours is creditable as time in a travel status subject to a deduction for the time an employee would have spent in a normal home-to-work or work-to-home commute.
6.	The following scenarios are not creditable as time in a travel status:
a)	Time spent at a temporary duty station between arrival and departure; 
b)	 “Unusual” or extended waiting time between actual periods of travel when an employee is free to rest, sleep, eat, or otherwise use the time for his or her own purposes;  
c)	Travel between home and a transportation terminal (e.g., airport or train station, etc.) within the limits of an employee’s official duty station and outside the employee’s regular working hours to or from the terminal is considered to be commuting time;  and
d)	Travel in conjunction with the performance of union representational duties.
C.	Limitation.  There is no limit on the number of hours an employee may accrue as CTT.

550-3-60	PROHIBITIONS
A.		Employees must not receive payment under any circumstances for any unused CTT earned under the provisions of this Instruction.  This prohibition includes payments to surviving beneficiaries in the event of an employee’s death.
B.		Accrued CTT under this Instruction must not be considered in applying premium pay limitations or the established aggregate limitations on pay.  
C.		Permanent Change of Station (PCS) travel is not considered time in a travel status for the purpose of earning CTT.
D.		OPDIVs may not restore an employee’s forfeited “use or lose” annual leave as a result of an employee’s decision to use his or her CTT in lieu of his or her annual leave.
E.		Criminal investigators who are receiving availability pay for the same period of time as would be credited under CTT may not also earn CTT.
F.		Employees who receive administratively uncontrollable overtime (AUO) pay for the same period of time as would be credited under CTT may not also earn CTT.
550-3-70	FORFEITURE OF UNUSED CTT
A.		When an employee voluntarily transfers to another agency including a promotion or change to lower grade action all unused CTT must be forfeited.
B.		When an employee separates from Federal Service all unused CTT must be forfeited, except in the following circumstances:
1.	An employee separates and returns to service with HHS after completing an obligation to serve in the uniformed services;
2.	An employee returns to work after an on-the-job injury with entitlement to compensation through the Workers Compensation Program; or
3.	An employee fails to use his/her accrued CTT before the end of the 26th pay period during which it was earned due to an exigency of the service beyond the employee’s control.  
4.	However, an employee must use all of the CTT accrued by the end of the 26th pay period following the pay period in which he/she returns to duty, or the CTT will be forfeited.
C.	When an employee moves from a covered Federal position to a position not covered by this Instruction (see Section 550-3-10 of this Instruction), he or she forfeits all unused CTT.  
D.		Exceptions.  When a covered HHS employee moves to another covered position at another HHS organization, all unused CTT is transferred to the employee for use at the new or gaining organization.
























550-11
HHS Instruction 550-11: Compensatory Time Off for Religious Observances
550-11-10 Purpose
This Instruction establishes the Department of Health and Human Services’ requirements regarding the accrual and use of compensatory time off for religious observances. Religious compensatory time off (RCTO) is granted to employees whose personal religious beliefs require the abstention from work during certain periods of time. Accordingly, employees may work overtime (see definition of overtime for purposes of RCTO, 550-11-40) and earn a special form of compensatory time off to make up for the time used in meeting personal religious requirements.

When provisions of this policy differ from changes in applicable law or regulation, the changes in law or regulation apply.

550-11-20 Authorities and References
5 U.S.C. § 5550a, Compensatory time off for religious observances - PDF
5 U.S.C. § 2105, Definition of employee - PDF
5 U.S.C. § 105, Definition of agency - PDF
5 C.F.R. part 550, subpart J, Compensatory Time Off for Religious Observances
84 FR 17931 (Apr. 29, 2019) - PDF
OPM Fact Sheet: Adjustment of Work Schedules for Religious Observances
EEOC Compliance Manual, Section 12
B–209327, 62 Comp. Gen. 589 (Jul. 26, 1983) - PDF
B-212486, (Oct. 31, 1983) (Comptroller General decision) - PDF
HHS Delegation of Human Resources Authorities, 2019
550-11-30 Coverage and Exclusions
This policy applies to all full-time and part-time HHS employees as defined in 5 U.S.C. § - PDF 2105,  - PDFwho have a scheduled tour of duty, including prevailing rate employees (WG, WL, WS), members of the Senior Executive Service (SES), experts and consultants appointed under 5 C.F.R. Part 304, and employees in senior-level (SL) and scientific or professional (ST) positions.
Intermittent employees and officers of the Commissioned Corps are not covered by this Instruction.
550-11-40 Definitions
Agency. An Executive department, a government corporation, or an independent establishment.
Employee. See 5 U.S.C. § 2105. (Note: The definition of employee used in 5 U.S.C. § 5541(c), affecting premium pay, does not apply for purposes of compensatory time off for religious observances.)
Overtime work. Work performed by an employee outside of his or her scheduled tour of duty for the purpose of making up time used for meeting personal religious requirements, as such term is explained in the definition of “religious compensatory time off” in this Instruction.  Overtime work also includes work performed by a part-time employee outside of his or her scheduled tour of duty, even if that work is below applicable overtime thresholds (e.g., below 40 hours in a week), and work an employee performs during (legal) holiday hours (within the employee’s scheduled tour of duty) during which the employee would otherwise be excused from duty.
Rate of basic pay. The rate of pay fixed by law or administrative action for the position held by an employee, including any special rate under 5 C.F.R. part 530, subpart C; locality rate under 5 C.F.R. part 531, subpart F; retained rate under 5 C.F.R. part 536; or similar rate under other legal authority before any deductions and excluding additional pay of any other kind. For example, a rate of basic pay does not include additional pay such as night shift differentials under 5 U.S.C. § 5343(f) or environmental differentials under 5 U.S.C. § 5343(c)(4).
Religious compensatory time off. Compensatory time off, as authorized by 5 U.S.C. 5550a, under which an employee whose personal religious beliefs require the abstention from work during certain periods of time may elect to perform overtime work in order to make up for time the employee takes off to meet those personal religious requirements. The religious requirements need not be officially mandated by a religious organization to which the employee belongs. It is sufficient that the employee’s personal religious beliefs cause the employee to feel an obligation that he or she should be absent from work for a religious purpose. An employee approved to perform overtime work under this subpart will be granted an equal amount of compensatory time off from his or her scheduled tour of duty (in lieu of overtime pay or other pay otherwise payable) to meet his or her personal religious obligations. For example, an employee who worked two hours of overtime to earn time off for personal religious obligations now has two hours that he or she can use for a past or future personal religious obligation (i.e., time for time basis.)
Scheduled tour of duty. The regular work hours in an established full-time or part-time work schedule during which the employee is charged leave or time off when absent.
550-11-50 Responsibilities
Assistant Secretary for Administration/Office of Human Resources (ASA/OHR)
Develops Department-wide policy and guidance regarding pay consistent with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations;
Periodically reviews OpDiv/StaffDiv pay procedures and actions to assure conformance with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Operating Divisions and Staff Divisions (OpDivs/StaffDivs)
Provide oversight when determining whether an employee meets the statutory, regulatory, and policy requirements for earning and using religious compensatory time off.
Ensure employees who use or request RCTO have an opportunity to earn religious compensatory time off by performing overtime work.
Ensure that employees’ requests for time off are documented as set forth in this Instruction.
Ensure that all denials of an employee’s request are in writing and provided promptly to the employee.
Initiate debt collection when employees with a negative RCTO balance leave federal service or transfer to another federal agency.
Ensure that the religious compensatory time off authority is implemented in accordance with merit system principles.
Ensure that all required records related to the implementation and use of the religious compensatory time off authority are maintained in a manner conducive to audit.
Employees should be advised to:
Notify their supervisor of intent to use RCTO.
Submit a request for RCTO in advance of the religious observance to accommodate necessary scheduling changes without interfering with the organization’s ability to efficiently carry out its mission.
Provide the supervisor (or designee) with the following information at the time the religious compensatory time off is requested:
The name and/or description of the religious observance that is the basis of the employee's request to be absent from work in order to meet the employee's personal religious requirements;
The date(s) and time(s) the employee plans to be absent to participate in the religious observances; and
The date(s) and time(s) the employee plans to perform overtime work to earn religious compensatory time off to make up for the absence.
Submit a revised schedule to the supervisor (or designee) to reflect changes in the event an adjustment to the dates and times of planned overtime work is required due to unforeseen circumstances.
Submit a written request to the supervisor (or designee) as soon as practical after an oral request is approved.
550-11-60 Policy
General Provisions
OpDivs/StaffDivs must afford employees time off from work for personal religious observances provided the requesting employee meets the requirements for requesting such time off as discussed in this Instruction. Although this policy provides for compensatory time off for religious observances, it does not preempt an employee from using other workplace flexibilities (i.e., annual leave, advanced annual leave, regular compensatory time off, alternative work schedule, and leave without pay (LWOP)) to accommodate their need to abstain from work due to a personal religious observance. A manager, supervisor, or other Department official may not coerce or require that an employee use these other workplace flexibilities in lieu of compensatory time off for religious observances.
Religious compensatory time off is distinct from other forms of compensatory time off because its exclusive purpose is to adjust the employee’s work schedule to accommodate a personal religious observance.
Religious compensatory time off for work performed is credited on a time-for-time basis. An employee earns religious compensatory time off when he or she works an equal amount of overtime prior or subsequent to being absent from his or her scheduled tour of duty in order to meet a personal religious requirement.
OpDivs/StaffDivs must approve an employee’s request for religious compensatory time off unless an appropriate official within the division has determined that approval would interfere with the employing component’s ability to carry out its mission efficiently. Supervisors (or their designees) may not make judgments as to the credibility of the employee’s religious beliefs or call into question the employee’s religious affiliation.
If an employee’s request to earn or use RCTO is denied, an appropriate official within the employing component must provide a written explanation for denying the request. All denials must be in writing whether or not the employee’s request is in writing or oral, and a copy of the denial given to the employee. Approvals and disapproval of employees’ requests should comport with merit system principles.
Relationship to Premium Pay and Overtime
Hours worked to earn RCTO provide a time off credit in lieu of any pay that would otherwise be payable for that work. As such, the premium pay provisions of 5 C.F.R. part 550, subpart A and section 7 of the Fair Labor Standards Act (see 5 C.F.R. part 551) do not apply to the overtime worked in exchanged for religious compensatory time off. Accordingly, employees have no entitlement to premium pay for the overtime worked in exchange.
RCTO should not be considered when applying the premium pay limitations of 5 C.F.R. § 550.105, Bi-weekly maximum earnings limitation; § 550.106, Annual maximum earnings limitation; and § 550.107, Premium payments capped on a bi- weekly basis when an annual limitation otherwise applies.
Employee Requests for Time Off
An employee seeking to use religious compensatory time off must submit to his or her immediate supervisor (or designee) a written request in advance of the requested period of absence. The request must include the information contained in § 5-11- 50(C)(3) of this Instruction.
To allow for appropriate scheduling of the employing component’s work, all written requests must be submitted to the appropriate official no later than the first day of the pay period immediately preceding the pay period in which the employee’s absence will occur.
The request may be in the form of a letter, memorandum, email addressed to the supervisor or designee, or any other documentable form prescribed by the OpDiv/StaffDiv. Although employees may initially make an oral request for the time off, a written request, as set forth by this Instruction, must be submitted as soon as practical after an oral request is approved.
In the event a change to the date(s) and or time(s) of planned period of overtime work is necessary due to an unforeseen circumstances, the employee must submit for approval a revised schedule to reflect the changes as soon as practicable.
Division Review and Decision on Requests
It is the Department’s policy to grant employee religious compensatory time off unless the adjustment to work schedules unduly interferes with the employing unit’s ability to efficiently accomplish its mission.
The supervisor (or designee) will not determine whether an employee’s belief is a discernible or correct interpretation of a religious creed. It is sufficient that the employee’s sincerely held personal religious beliefs cause the individual to feel an obligation that he or she should be absent from work for a religious observance.
Supervisors (or designees) should endeavor to provide the employee with an opportunity to work the overtime hours that will be exchanged for religious compensatory time off before or after the time is taken. The employee must simultaneously schedule his or her request for RCTO and the time he or she plans to work overtime to make up the approved RCTO. Furthermore, in light of the recovery procedures discussed in § 550-11-60 (E), supervisors (or designees) must make reasonable efforts to allow an employee to work overtime before the specified deadline (i.e., up to 13 pay periods before the religious observance) to cover advanced religious compensatory time off.
Accrual and Use of Time Off
While there is no limit on the number of hours an employee may earn and use for RCTO, employees may not accumulate more time off than is needed to accommodate an approved request for religious compensatory time off. An employee may only accumulate the amount of overtime necessary to cover the specific date(s) and time(s) for which he or she has submitted a request for religious compensatory time off.
If an employee does not use his or her earned religious compensatory time off as scheduled:
The unused time may be redirected towards a future religious observance that has been approved, even if the future observance is more than 13 pay periods after the compensatory time off was originally earned, regardless of any time limitations discussed below.
The employee may not earn any additional religious compensatory time off until the unused time is used or unless the need for additional time is established and documented.
As a general rule, religious compensatory time off may be earned up to 13 pay periods in advance of using the time off or within 13 pay periods following the use of RCTO. If a religious compensatory time off is used before earning it, then the 13 pay period time frame begins on the first day of the following pay period. For example, an employee used advanced religious compensatory time off in pay period 2. As such, the employee has 13 pay periods to earn the religious compensatory time off beginning pay period 3. If the employee’s absence spans more than one pay period, the pay period in which the last day of absence occurred is used to determine the first day of the pay period by which the employee must start working the overtime hours to recover the time owed.
When an employee, who was granted advanced religious compensatory time off (i.e., used, but not yet earned), fails to work the required overtime prior to the 14th pay period, the supervisor (or designee) should take immediate corrective action to recover the time owed. The supervisor (or designee) must charge the following paid time off accounts to recover the time in this order:
Compensatory time off in lieu of regular overtime
Time off awards
Compensatory time off for travel
Annual leave
Credit hours
To recover the time owed, each account must be fully exhausted before charging the next available account. Under no circumstances should the time owed be allocated among multiple accounts unless doing so is necessary because an account is fully exhausted.
If a negative balance results after charging the employee’s accounts as described above, the supervisor (or designee) must charge the employee leave without pay to resolve the deficit. Thereafter, the employee will be indebted for the monetary equivalent of the balance and the OpDiv/StaffDiv must initiate debt collection.
Unused time-off hours are not forfeited, but remain to the employee’s credit until used or the employee separates from federal service or transfers to another federal agency. Unused RCTO cannot be paid as overtime premium pay, provided as compensatory time off in lieu of overtime pay, or converted to any other forms of time off.
Documentation and Records Retention
The employee must simultaneously schedule his or her request for RCTO and the time he or she plans to work overtime to make up the approved RCTO. This requirement provides a clear record of the employee’s adjusted work schedule. For each employee, the supervisor (or designee) must maintain records of the:
Name and/or description of religious observances for which time off is granted in accordance with this Instruction.
Dates and times requested for RCTO.
Dates and amount of RCTO earned and used.
RCTO records must be maintained for three (3) years from date of approval, see also Section 550-11-90, Documentation and Accountability.
550-11-70 When Employees Transfer to another Federal Agency or Separate from Federal Service
Employees who leave HHS, either to depart federal service or transfer to another federal agency, must be compensated for unused religious compensatory time off. The OpDiv/StaffDiv must use the hourly rate of the employee’s basic pay at the time the overtime was earned to compute the value of unused time and amount owed to the employee. Divide the employee’s annual rate of basic pay by 2,087 hours (2,756 hours for firefighters) to compute the employee’s hourly rate of basic pay.
Refer to § 550-11-60(E) for information on processing employees who leave HHS with a negative RCTO balance. Note: The debt collection process is different for employees separating from federal service. As such, the OpDiv/StaffDiv must ensure that deficits for separating employees are resolved prior to the employee’s last day with HHS.
550-11-80 Conflicts with Collective Bargaining Agreements
To the extent that existing collective bargaining agreements (CBA) contain provisions that are inconsistent with the either 5 U.S.C. §5550a or the provisions of the new OPM regulations (5 C.F.R. Part 550, subpart J), then those regulations supersede the conflicting provisions in the CBA as a matter of law. In these cases, those provisions of the CBA should be renegotiated and coordinated with the Assistant Secretary for Administration’s National Labor Relations division.
For a CBA that takes effect on or after the date the religious compensatory time regulations are published, regulatory provisions will supersede conflicting provisions in the CBA during any period of time following the applicable regulatory implementation date (i.e., May 29, 2019.)
CBA provisions that are consistent with the regulations remain in effect until the CBA provisions expire or are renegotiated.
OpDivs/StaffDivs are advised to consult with the National Labor Relations division for CBA impact determination.
550-11-90 Documentation and Accountability
Records should be retained to allow for third-party reconstruction. Records associated with personnel actions, including all documentation sufficient for third party reconstruction purposes, must be retained according to the record disposition schedule. Generally, all records created in a given year must be retained for a total of three (3) full years. Records involved in litigation and grievance processes may be destroyed only after official notification is received from OPM, Department of Justice, courts, the Office of the General Counsel, etc. that the matter has been fully litigated, or resolved, and closed.
HHS OHR will conduct periodic accountability reviews to analyze compliance with this Instruction, HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.


















550-12
550-12-00    PURPOSE

This Instruction states the policy and procedures for distributing salary and other payments processed through the Department's central payroll system by the Personnel and Pay Systems Division (PPSD).  This Instruction mostly reflects previous Department policy except that the grounds for waiver have been narrowed according to law.

550-12-10     COVERAGE

This Instruction implements some of the provisions of the Debt Collection improvement Act of 1996 (P.L. 104-134) that apply to the wages, salary, and other payments (including, but not limited to, lump sum annual leave payments, supplemental salary payments and awards) that become payable to employees who enter on duty on or after July 26, 1996. Coverage applies when recipients enter into Federal service, transfer from another agency, or resume Federal service after a break in employment.  Other parts of P.L. 104-134 require that by January 1, 1999 electronic funds transfer (EFT) will become mandatory for all employees.

550-12-20     REFERENCES

A. The Debt Collection Improvement Act of 1996 (P.L. 104-134)

B. Treasury Financial Management Service interim rule to implement P.L. 104-134 (31 CFR part 208)

550-12-30     POLICY

Salary and other payments processed through the Department's central payroll system shall be made by EFT. Waivers of the policy may only be granted by officials with delegated authority upon receipt of written certification from the recipient that the recipient of the payment does not have an account with a financial institution or authorized payment agent. The Department does not have authority to waive the requirement for payment by EFT for any other reason.

550-12-40     PROCEDURES

Employees who enter on duty on or after July 26, 1996 must designate one or more financial institutions or other authorized payment agents. Further, recipients must provide the servicing personnel office with the information such as Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN) and banking information necessary to receive EFT payments through the designated institution(s).

New employees who wish to request a waiver of the requirement that payments will be made by EFT may submit written certification that they do not have an account with a financial institution or authorized payment agent. Operating Division Personnel Officers shall develop procedures for processing waiver requests and ensure accountability for implementation of the provisions of this Instruction.

 

HHS Instruction 550-12- Exhibit A

DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY TO WAIVE PAYMENT OF SALARY
AND OTHER PAYMENTS BY ELECTRONIC FUNDS TRANSFER

A.	Authority Delegated
	
1.	I hereby delegate to Operating Division Personnel Officers authority to waive the requirement for payment by electronic funds transfer (EFT) of salary, wages and related payments, including but not limited to lump sum annual leave payments, supplemental salary payments and awards, upon receipt of written certification from the recipient that the recipient of the payment does not have an account with a financial institution or authorized payment agent.
	
2.	The Department does not have authority to waive payment of salary and related payments by EFT for employees who enter on duty on or after July 26, 1996 for any other reason.
	
3.	Such waivers are governed by the Debt Collection Improvement Act of 1996 (P. L. 104-1 34), applicable regulations of the Department of the Treasury, and HHS financial and personnel policies and procedures.
	
4.	This authority may be redelegate.
	
B.	Prior Delegations

With respect to employees who enter on duty on or after July 26, 1996, this delegation supersedes the previous delegation to waive mandatory EFT dated December 28, 1994. That previous delegation remains in effect with respect to employees who were on the Department's rolls before July 26, 1996.
	
C.	Effective Date

This delegation is effective on the date of the transmittal hereof.






















575-1
575-1-10  Purpose and Authority
Purpose:  This Instruction is promulgated in accordance with the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) regulations found at 5 C.F.R. pt. 575, subparts A-C governing recruitment, relocation, and retention incentives.  It incorporates revisions to the regulations up to and effective as of September 13, 2013.  As required, the Department has established this plan to govern the use of this incentive authority by its divisions.
Authority:  This Instruction is authorized by:
Section 101 of the Federal Workforce Flexibility Act of 2004
5 U.S.C. § 5753-54
5 C.F.R. pts. 530 and 575
575-1-20  Coverage and Exclusions
Coverage:  Employees appointed or placed in the following categories or positions are eligibleto receive recruitment, relocation, and retention incentives:  General Schedule (GS); senior-level (SL) or scientific or professional (ST) position paid under 5 U.S.C. § 5376; Senior Executive Service (SES) paid under 5 U.S.C. § 5383 as career appointees; law enforcement officers (LEOs); Executive Schedule paid under 5 U.S.C. § 5311-17; prevailing rate positions; certain employees appointed under Title 42 of the U.S. Code; positions for which a waiver for an incentive greater than 25 percent has been approved by OPM; or any other position in a category for which payment of an incentive has been approved by OPM at the request of the head of the employing agency, or for which OPM has extended eligibility, such as the Senior Biomedical Research Service (SBRS).
Exclusions:  The following types of employees are excluded from receiving incentives for recruitment, relocation, and retention.
Employees in positions to which the individuals are appointed by the President, either by and with the advice and consent of the Senate or without the advice and consent of the Senate.
Employees in positions in the Senior Executive Service as noncareer appointees (as defined in 5 U.S.C. § 3132(a)(7)).
Employees in positions excepted from the competitive service by reason of their confidential, policy-determining, policy-making, or policy-advocating nature.
Members of the Public Health Service Commissioned Corps.
Agency heads or those expected to receive an appointment as an agency head (i.e., those appointed to other positions in anticipation of subsequent approval to be appointed as the agency head).
Employees appointed pursuant to Title 42 of the U.S. Code, except 42 U.S.C. § 209(f)-(g) appointees, members of the SBRS, and other employees to the extent permitted by laws, regulations, and governing authorities.  (AAOs are encouraged to confer with OHR to verify which Title 42 employees are eligible.)
575-1-30  Definitions
Recruitment Incentive:  An incentive paid to a newly appointed employee if it has been determined that the position is critical to the mission of the organization and is likely to be difficult to fill in the absence of such an incentive.
Relocation Incentive:  An incentive paid to a current federal employee who must relocate to accept a position in a different geographic area (at least 50 miles or more) if it has been determined that the position is critical to the mission of the organization and is likely to be difficult to fill in the absence of such an incentive.  Although the payment of relocation incentives is payable only to current federal employees, relocation allowances or “expenses” may be paid to current or newly appointed employees in accordance with General Services Administration, Federal Travel Regulation, Chapter 302, Relocation Allowances.
Retention Incentive:  An incentive paid to a current federal employee if it is determined the unusually high or unique qualifications of the employee or a special need of the organization for the employee’s services in a position critical to the mission of the organization make it essential to retain the employee, and the employee would be likely to leave the federal service in the absence of a retention incentive.  An incentive is also allowable to retain an employee or group of employees when a general or specific notice of closure or relocation has been announced and they are essential to retain for mission requirements and are likely to leave for a different position in the federal service in the absence of a retention incentive.
Newly Appointed Employee
An individual receiving his or her first appointment, regardless of tenure, as an employee of the federal government.
An appointment of a former employee of the federal government following a break in federal government service of at least 90 days from a previous appointment.
To the extent not otherwise excluded an appointment when the employee’s federal service during the 90 day period immediately preceding the appointment was not in a position excluded by 5 C.F.R. § 575.104 and was limited to one or more of the following:
A time-limited or nonpermanent appointment in the competitive or excepted service.
Employment with the Washington, D.C. government when the candidate was appointed to that position on or after October 1, 1987.
Appointment as an expert or consultant under 5 U.S.C. § 3109 and 5 C.F.R. pt. 304.
A provisional appointment.
Employment under an Internship Program pursuant to 5 C.F.R. § 213.3402(a).
Employment as an SES limited appointee or limited emergency appointee (as defined in 5 U.S.C. § 3132(a)(5)-(6)).
Certain nonappropriated fund employees—e.g., an employee in a nonappropriated fund instrumentality (NAFI) position meeting the definition of a prevailing rate position in 5 U.S.C. § 5342(a)(3) as long as the position is not otherwise excluded by 5 C.F.R. § 575.104, 575.204, and 575.304 and if appointment in the position to which the incentive is being granted occurs after at least a 90-day break in federal service.  (AAOs are encouraged to confer with OHR to verify if an NAFI employee is an eligible recipient.)
Authorized Agency Official (AAO):  As provided in the Department’s delegation of authority, the OpDiv or StaffDiv head or an official to whom the division head has redelegated the authority, in writing.  Except in cases where the OpDiv or StaffDiv head is the immediate supervisor of the employee receiving the incentive, at all times the AAO must occupy a position that is at least one level higher in the organizational hierarchy than the immediate supervisor of the employee receiving the incentive.
Rate of Basic Pay:  Rate of pay fixed by law or administrative action for the position to which an employee will be appointed before deductions and including any special rate or locality pay.  This does not include pay of any other kind such as night or environmental differentials, or Physicians’ Comparability Allowance (PCA).  Incentive payments are not a component of basic pay for any purpose.
Aggregate Pay Limitations:  Unless otherwise permitted by statute, regulation, or other governing authority, for GS and SBRS employees, payment of these incentives is subject to the aggregate limitation on pay in a calendar year, which may not exceed the rate of pay of Level I of the Executive Schedule (5 C.F.R. § 530.202).  For SES, SL, and ST employees, payment of these incentives is subject to the aggregate limitation on pay in a calendar year, which may not exceed the rate payable to the Vice President at the end of the calendar year.  (Note:  Whenever certification of HHS’s SES performance management system is pending OPM approval, SES employees are limited to the aggregate limitation on pay in a calendar year that may not exceed the rate of pay of Level I of the Executive Schedule).
Service Agreement:  Unless otherwise provided by these Instructions, a written agreement that must be signed by an employee prior to receiving payment of any amount related to an incentive under this Instruction 5 C.F.R. pt. 575, subparts A-C that requires completion of a specified period of employment.  (Note:  All incentives that require OPM approval, as explained in this Instruction and applicable sections of 5 C.F.R. pt. 575, subparts A-C, must have a service agreement.)
Service Period Limitations:  The period of service required for an agreement approving a recruitment or relocation incentive cannot be less than six months nor more than four years.  If a service agreement has already exceeded the four-year time period, it shall terminate at the end of that current fiscal year.  (Note: A service agreement is not necessary for biweekly retention incentive payments, unless the incentive is one that required approval of a waiver request by OPM.)   Service periods begin on the first day of a pay period and end on the last day of a pay period.   
575-1-40  Responsibilities
The following officials and offices are responsible for administering this policy in accordance with the appropriate statutes and regulations.

ASA, Office of Human Resources (OHR)

The OHR is responsible for:
Updating and maintaining this policy.
Preparing and submitting periodic reports regarding usage of 3Rs incentives including the annual 3Rs report to OPM.
Monitoring the use of these incentives to ensure that payments are consistent with the requirements of this policy.
Publishing specific criteria applicable to documenting position criticality to the organization.
Reviewing and approving 3Rs waivers greater than 25 and up to 50 percent and submitting the request to OPM for final authorization.
Operating Divisions (OpDivs) and Staff Divisions (StaffDivs)

OpDivs and StaffDivs are responsible for:
Providing oversight as it relates to determining whether an employee meets the statutory requirements for receiving a recruitment, relocation, or retention incentive.
Ensuring that all AAOs have a written delegation of authority addressing the extent and limitations, if any, of powers applicable to the 3Rs incentives program.
Documenting the criteria used for determining the amount of an incentive payment, method of payment, length of a required service period, or termination of a service agreement.
Ensuring this policy is applied in a consistent manner when determining the length of service agreements for employees in similar circumstances.
Submitting all required documentation for authorization and payment of any incentive to their operating human resources center in order to assure regulatory and policy requirements are met prior to authorization of payment.
Recovering payments from an employee when payments attributable to an incentive create an indebtedness to the OpDiv or StaffDiv.
For multiyear service agreements, reviewing and certifying annually in writing on the service agreement that the recipient of the incentive continues to meet all requirements therein and continued payment of the incentive is within the division’s budgetary appropriations.
Notifying incentive recipients in writing whenever the incentive is terminated.
Operating Human Resources Centers:

Each operating human resources center is responsible for:
Establishing and maintaining documentation and records containing the justification and service agreement, if applicable, for each issuance of an incentive payment and making such documentation available for review and analysis upon request by the OHR or OPM.
Ensuring compliance with regulatory and policy requirements prior to processing the incentive request for payment.
Providing input to OHR, as required, for periodic or annual reporting requirements in the use of these incentives as required for accountability purposes.
575-1-50  Recruitment Incentives and Services Agreements
An AAO may approve recruitment incentives paid under this policy for a newly appointed employee to a position that is critical to the mission of the organization and is likely to be difficult to fill without an incentive.  Determinations to pay the incentive must be made and approved before the prospective employee enters on duty.  Recruitment incentives are not retroactive and cannot be granted or approved after the employee enters on duty.
Prior to receiving any payment attributable to the recruitment incentive, the employee must sign an agreement to complete a required service period of not less than six months and no more than four years of employment with the OpDiv or StaffDiv, or a successor organization in the event of a transfer of function.
An AAO may approve recruitment incentives up to 25 percent of an employee’s annual rate of basic pay at the beginning of the service period.
An AAO will determine the percentage of the recruitment incentive based on one or more of the criteria listed in paragraph H of this section.  The approved amount, up to 25 percent, will be multiplied by the number of years (including fractions of a year) in the service period not to exceed four years.
OPM may waive the 25 percent limitation on recruitment incentives based upon a critical agency need and set the limitation up to 50 percent of an employee’s annual rate of pay at the beginning of a service period multiplied by the number of years (including fractions of a year) in the service period not to exceed two years.  In no event should the employee’s total recruitment incentive exceed 100 percent of the employee’s annual rate of pay at the beginning of the service period.  An AAO will submit requests for waiver, through the OpDiv or StaffDiv head or designee, to the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources.  Each waiver request must provide the information prescribed in 5 C.F.R. § 575.109(c)(2).
For group recruitment incentives only.
An AAO may target groups of similar positions identified as difficult to fill, establish criteria in advance for offering recruitment incentives to all newly appointed employees in the target groups, and authorize an official who is not lower than a candidate’s supervisor to discuss a potential recruitment incentive (in any amount within a preestablished range) to a candidate.  Group incentives may not be paid to employees in SL, ST, or SBRS positions, employees appointed as SES noncareer employees, employees in Executive Schedule positions, or employees in similar categories for which payment of recruitment incentives has been approved by OPM.
The targeted group of employees must be defined using factors that relate to the conditions described in paragraph H of this section.  Factors that may be appropriate include:  occupational series, grade level, distinctive job duties, unique competencies required for the position, and geographic location.
AAOs must review the decision to target a group of similar positions for the purpose of granting a recruitment incentive and certify, in writing, that the targeted positions are still likely to be difficult to fill.  If the AAO determines the positions are no longer likely to be difficult to fill, the OpDiv or StaffDiv must terminate the recruitment incentive to the newly appointed employees in that group on a group basis.
Recruitment incentives must be approved by an AAO who is at least one level higher in the organization’s hierarchy than the employee’s (or group of employees’) supervisor unless there is no higher level in the OpDiv or StaffDiv.
In determining whether to grant a recruitment incentive, the AAO must consider:
Availability and quality of candidates possessing the competencies required for the position, including the success of recent efforts to recruit candidates for the position or similar position using indicators such as offer-acceptance rates, proportion of positions filled, and the length of time required to fill similar positions.
Salaries typically paid outside the federal government for similar positions.
Recent turnover in similar positions.
Employment trends and labor market factors that may affect the organization’s ability to recruit candidates for similar positions.
Special or unique competencies required for the position.
Organization efforts to use nonpay authorities, such as special training and work scheduling flexibilities, to resolve difficulties alone or in combination with a recruitment incentive.
Desirability of the duties, work or organizational environment, or geographic location of the position.
Other supporting factors.
Positions may be considered to meet the eligibility criteria listed above if OPM has approved the use of a direct-hire authority for the position (or group of positions) under 5 C.F.R. pt. 337, subpart B.
Each determination to pay a recruitment incentive must be documented.  The written justification should include the determination that the position is likely to be difficult to fill in the absence of the incentive; the supporting factors used to authorize the incentive; the reasons for determining the amount and timing of the payments; and the reasons for determining the length of the service period.
The OpDiv or StaffDiv will pay recruitment incentives as specified in the employee’s service agreement.  The incentives may be paid by any of the following methods:
In a lump sum at the beginning of the service period stated in the agreement.
In equal or variable installment payments throughout the service period.
As a final lump-sum payment at the end of the specified service period.
The recruitment incentive (either as a lump sum or as the first of a series of installment payments) may be paid to an employee who has not yet reported to duty once he or she has signed a service agreement.
Service agreements for recruitment incentives must contain:
The period of service (in months and years) agreed to by the employee and the total amount authorized for payment.
The actual beginning and ending dates of the service period.  The service period must commence on the first day of an employee’s service with the organization and end on the last day of a pay period—except when the employee:
Begins work other than the first day of the pay period, the service period will begin on the first day of the next pay period.  If the first day of a pay period is a holiday, the effective date of the employee’s appointment and other paperwork is the Tuesday immediately following the holiday.
Is required to complete a probationary period or an initial period of formal training, the employee’s service period may be delayed until the beginning of the pay period following the completion of the probationary or training period. Because the AAO must approve the recruitment incentive before the employee enters on duty, the service agreement also must specify that there is no obligation to pay any portion of the incentive if the employee does not successfully complete the probationary period or training.
The method of payment and, if paid in installments, the date and amount of each installment payment.
The conditions under which the AAO must terminate the agreement (i.e., if an employee is demoted or separated for cause, receives a rating of record of less than “Fully Satisfactory” or equivalent, or otherwise fails to fulfill the terms of the service agreement).
The terms or conditions that may result in termination of the service agreement (e.g., insufficient funds, reassignment to a different type of position, or any additional terms that, if violated by the employee, will result in termination of the agreement.  If there are any such additional terms, they must be stated in the agreement.)  See 5 C.F.R. § 575.110-11
The extent to which periods of time on detail, in a nonpay status, or in a paid leave status are creditable towards completion of the service period.
The consequence of both voluntary and management decisions to terminate service agreements (e.g., conditions under which the employee must repay any unearned portion of the incentive he or she may already have received).
A statement that the decision to terminate a service agreement may not be grieved or appealed.
AAOs must terminate recruitment incentives as warranted, ensure that payments are appropriately made or recovered when necessary, and the employee notified of the decision to terminate as provided in this subsection.
Agreements must terminate when an employee is demoted or separated for cause, receives a less than “Fully Successful” or equivalent rating of record, or otherwise fails to fulfill the terms of the service agreement. 
Agreements may be unilaterally terminated based solely upon management needs such as reduction-in-force or insufficient funds. 
An employee who fails to fulfill the service agreement is entitled only to payments that have already been received up to the amount attributable to completed service, unless the agreement states otherwise.  If the AAO unilaterally terminates the service agreement based solely upon management needs prior to the service period completion date, the employee is entitled to all incentive payments already received and any additional payments, if necessary, to provide payment in the amount attributable to completed service. 
Employees must reimburse the Department the sum of all benefits received under a service agreement that is in excess of the amount attributable to completed service.  In the event an employee fails to reimburse the Department for amounts owed, the outstanding amount shall be recovered from the employee under regulations for collection by offset from an indebted government employee under 5 U.S.C. § 5514, 5 C.F.R. pt. 550, subpart K, and 45 C.F.R. § 33.1 et seq. 
An employee must repay all payments attributable to a recruitment incentive when the service agreement is terminated due to an employee’s separation resulting from materially false or inaccurate statements, deception, or fraud in examination or appointment; or as a result of failing to meet employment qualifications.
In accordance with 5 U.S.C. § 5373(g) and 5 C.F.R. § 575.111(h), an AAO may waive recovery of the amount in excess of that attributable to completed service, if in the AAO’s judgment, collection would be against equity and good conscience and not in the best interest of the United States.  Under no circumstances can a waiver be granted when an employee is separated because of materially false or inaccurate statements, deception, or fraud in examination or appointment as prescribed in paragraph 5 of this subsection.  Payments for which collection is waived are deemed to be a valid.
The AAO must notify an employee in writing when the service agreement is terminated.
Employees cannot grieve or appeal any decision to terminate the service agreement.
Recruitment incentives are not a component of an employee’s rate of basic pay for any purpose.
Pursuant to 5 C.F.R. § 575.105(c), a recruitment incentive cannot commence during a period of employment established under any service agreement required for a:
Relocation incentive authorized in accordance with this Instruction and 5 C.F.R. pt. 575, subpart B.
Retention incentive for which an employee receives payments with or without a service agreement authorized under this Instruction and 5 C.F.R. pt. 575, subpart C.
575-1-60  Relocation Incentive and Service Agreements
An AAO may approve relocation incentives paid under this policy to a current federal employee who, without a break in service, must relocate to accept a position in a different geographic area, as defined in 5 C.F.R. § 575.205(b), that is mission critical and likely to be difficult to fill without such an incentive.  Relocation incentives are not retroactive and cannot be granted or approved after the employee enters on duty in the position in the new geographic area for which the incentive is being authorized.
The relocation incentive is payable only if the employee provides proof of residency in the new geographic area and maintains residency in the new geographic area for the entire service period as established by the agreement.
An AAO may approve relocation incentives whether the relocation is permanent or temporary. 
Prior to receiving any payment attributable to the relocation incentive, the employee must sign an agreement to complete a service period of not less than six months and no more than four years of employment with the OpDiv or StaffDiv, or successor organization in the event of a transfer of function, at the new duty station. 
An AAO may approve relocation incentives up to 25 percent of an employee’s annual rate of basic pay at the beginning of the service. 
The AAO will determine the percentage of the relocation incentive based on one or more of the criteria listed in paragraph K of this section.  The approved percentage will be multiplied by the number of years (including fractions of a year) in the service period not to exceed four years.
In accordance with 5 C.F.R. § 575.209(c)(1), OPM may waive the 25 percent limitation on relocation incentives based on a critical agency need and set the limitation up to 50 percent of an employee’s annual rate of pay at the beginning of a service period multiplied by the number of years (including fractions of a year) in the service period not to exceed two years.  In no event should the employee’s total relocation incentive exceed 100 percent of the employee’s annual rate of pay at the beginning of the service period.  AAOs will submit requests for waiver, through the OpDiv or StaffDiv head, to the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources.  Each waiver request will provide the information prescribed in 5 C.F.R. § 575.209(c)(2). 
To be eligible for a relocation incentive, the employee must have a rating of record of at least “Fully Successful” or equivalent for the position held immediately before the move.
For group relocation incentives only.
An AAO may waive the requirement to make case-by-case determinations and approve group relocation incentives under the following conditions:
The employee is a member of a group of employees subject to a mobility agreement and relocation incentives are necessary to retain the group of employees to ensure continuation of operations.
A major organizational unit is relocated to a new duty station and the relocation incentives will ensure continued operations of that unit without undue disruption to operations or functions deemed essential to the division’s mission.
Decisions to approve a waiver for a group incentive must be supported by written determinations that specify the group of covered employees, the conditions under which the waiver is approved, and the period of time for which the waiver may be applied.
Relocation incentives must be approved by an AAO who is at least one level higher in the organization’s hierarchy than the employee’s (or group of employees’) supervisor unless there is no higher level in the OpDiv or StaffDiv.
In determining whether to grant an incentive, the AAO must consider:
Availability and quality of candidates possessing the competencies required for the position, including the success of recent efforts to recruit candidates for the position or similar positions using indicators such as offer-acceptance rates, proportion of positions filled, and the length of time required to fill similar positions.
Salaries typically paid outside the federal government for similar positions.
Recent turnover in similar positions.
Employment trends and labor market factors that may affect the organization’s ability to recruit candidates for similar positions.
Special or unique competencies required for the position.
Organization efforts to use nonpay authorities, such as special training and work scheduling flexibilities, to resolve difficulties alone or in combination with a recruitment incentive.
Desirability of the duties, work or organizational environment, or geographic location of the position.
Other supporting factors.
Positions may be considered to meet the eligibility criteria above if OPM has approved the use of a direct-hire authority for the position (or group of positions) under 5 C.F.R. pt. 337, subpart B.
Each determination to pay a relocation incentive must be documented.  The written justification must include:
The basis for determining that a position is likely to be difficult to fill based upon the factors enumerated in paragraph K of this section.
The basis for authorizing the incentive for an employee.
The basis for the total amount of the incentive.
The basis for the timing of the approved incentive payments.
The basis for the length of the required service period.
Affirmation that the employee’s new position is in a different geographic area—i.e., the worksite of the new position is located 50 miles or more from the worksite of the position held immediately before the move or affirmation that the 50-mile requirement was waived and justification for the waiver.
Affirmation that the employee established a residence in the new geographic area.
The OpDiv or StaffDiv will pay relocation incentives as specified in the employee’s service agreement.  The incentives may be paid by any of the following methods:
In a lump sum at the beginning of the service period stated in the agreement.
In equal or variable installment payments throughout the service period.
As a final lump-sum payment at the end of the specified service period.
Service agreements for relocation incentives must contain the following information:
Definition of the boundaries of the new geographic area to which the employee must relocation.
Statement that the employee is required to maintain residency in the new geographic area for the duration of the service period established in the agreement.
The period of service (in months and years) agreed to by the employee and the total amount authorized for payment.
The actual beginning and ending dates of the service period.  The service period must begin on the first day of an employee’s service date at the new duty station and end on the last day of a pay period—except if the employee:
Begins work other than on the first day of the pay period, the service period will commence on the first day of the next pay period.  If the first day of a pay period is a holiday, the effective date of the employee’s appointment and other paperwork is the Tuesday immediately following the holiday.
Is required to complete an initial period of formal training or probationary period, the employee’s service period may be delayed until the beginning of the pay period following the completion of the training or probationary period.  Because the AAO must approve the relocation incentive before the employee enters on duty at the new duty station, the service agreement also must specify that there is no obligation to pay any portion of the incentive if the employee does not successfully complete the probationary period or training.
The method of payment.  If paid in installments, the date and amount of each installment payment.
The conditions under which the AAO must terminate the agreement (i.e., if an employee is demoted or separated for cause, receives a rating of record of less than “Fully Successful” or equivalent, otherwise fails to fulfill the terms of the service agreement, or fails to maintain residency throughout the service period required by the agreement).
The terms or conditions that may result in termination of the service agreement (e.g., insufficient funds, reassignment to a different type of position, or any additional terms that if violated by the employee will result in termination of the agreement).
The extent to which periods of time on detail, or in a nonpay or paid leave status is creditable toward completion of the service period.
The consequence of both voluntary and management decisions to terminate service agreements (e.g., conditions under which the employee must repay any unearned portion of the incentive he or she may already have received).
A statement that the decision to terminate a service agreement may not be grieved or appealed.
AAOs must terminate relocation incentives as warranted, ensure that payments are appropriately made or recovered when necessary, and the employee notified of the decision to terminate the incentive as provided in this subsection.
Agreements must terminate when an employee is demoted or separated for cause, receives a less than “Fully Successful” or equivalent rating of record, otherwise fails to fulfill the terms of the service agreement, or fails to maintain residency in the new geographic area at any point during the service period established by the agreement.  Under these circumstances, the employee is entitled to retain relocation incentive payments previously paid by the OpDiv or StaffDiv that are attributable to the completed service period. 
Agreements may be unilaterally terminated based solely upon management needs such as reduction-in-force or insufficient funds.  Under these circumstances, an employee is entitled to all relocation incentive payments attributable to completed service and to retain any portion of the incentive payment he or she has already received that is attributable to uncompleted service. 
In accordance with 5 C.F.R. § 575.211(f), the OpDiv or StaffDiv is not obligated to pay any amount not yet received by the employee that is attributable to completed service, unless the division agreed to do so in the service agreement.  But if the employee received relocation incentive payments in excess of the amount that is attributable to the completed portion of the service period, he or she must repay the excess amount.
To determine the amount attributable to completed service versus the amount that cannot be attributed to completed service, the total amount of the authorized relocation incentive must be prorated across the length of the service period.  5 C.F.R. § 575.211(i).
In the event that an employee fails to reimburse the Department for amounts owed, the outstanding amount will be recovered from the employee under regulations for collection by offset from an indebted government employee under 5 U.S.C. § 5514, 5 C.F.R. pt. 550, subpart K, and 45 C.F.R. § 33.1 et seq. 
In accordance with 5 U.S.C. § 5373(g) and 5 C.F.R. § 575.211(h), an AAO may waive recovery of the amount in excess of the amount attributable to completed service if in the AAO’s judgment, collection would be against equity and good conscience and not in the best interests of the United States.  Payments for which collection is waived are deemed to be a valid payment. 
The AAO must notify the employee in writing when a service agreement is terminated. 
Employees cannot grieve or appeal any decision to terminate the service agreement.
Relocation incentives are not a component of an employee’s rate of basic pay for any purpose. 
In accordance with 5 C.F.R. § 575.206(d), an OpDiv or StaffDiv may not commence a relocation incentive service agreement during a period of employment established under any service agreement required for a:
Recruitment incentive authorized under this Instruction and 5 C.F.R. pt. 575, subpart A.
Relocation incentive previously authorized under this Instruction and 5 C.F.R. pt. 575, subpart B.
A relocation incentive service agreement may commence during a period of employment established under a service agreement for a previously authorized retention incentive or for which an employee is receiving previously authorized retention incentive payments without a service agreement pursuant to this Instruction and 5 C.F.R. pt. 575, subpart C.  The service period for such a relocation incentive service agreement and the service period required by the previously authorized retention incentive service agreement must be fulfilled concurrently.  5 C.F.R. § 575.206(e).  (Note:  This is the only circumstance for which simultaneous payments of multiple incentives or concurrent service agreements authorized pursuant to this Instruction and 5 C.F.R. pt. 575, subparts A-C is permissible.)
575-1-70  Retention Incentive and Service Agreements
An AAO may approve a retention incentive paid under this Instruction to an individual employee who has unusually high or unique qualifications or when the organization has a special need for the employee’s services that makes it essential to retain the employee and the employee would be likely to leave federal service in the absence of an incentive.  An AAO may approve a retention incentive to a group of employees with unusually high or unique qualifications or when a special need for the employees’ service makes it essential to retain the employees in that group and there is a high risk that a significant number of the employees in the group would be likely to leave the federal service in the absence of a retention incentive.  Group retention incentives cannot be paid to employees in SL, ST, or Executive Schedule positions, or SBRS employees in similar categories for which payment of retention incentives has been approved by OPM. 
It is not intended that OpDivs and StaffDivs will use retention incentives as a long-term staffing flexibility.  Instead, the organization should have in place an effective succession plan for leadership and nonleadership positions, detailing its strategy to eventually eliminate or reduce the need for the use of a retention incentive.  Succession plans:
Must discuss the quality and availability of potential sources of employees who possess the competencies required for the position and who, with minimal training, cost, and disruption of service to the public, could perform the full range of duties and responsibilities of the employee’s position at the level performed by the incumbent.
May include future recruitment and training efforts, any changes in the distribution of workflow, the effectiveness of processes or measures that have been considered to retain the employee’s services without paying the incentives.
AAOs should ensure that succession plans are used to alleviate the need for long-term use of retention incentives.
AAOs must review, at least annually, all retention incentives, including those administered without a service agreement, against the factors enumerated in paragraph K of this section and certify in writing the decision to pay an incentive—thereby confirming that circumstances still warrant continued payment.
An AAO cannot approve a retention incentive prior to an individual’s employment with the OpDiv or StaffDiv. 
Prior to receiving any payment attributable to the retention incentive, the employee may be required to sign a service agreement for a specified period of employment with the OpDiv or StaffDiv, or a successor organization in the event of a transfer of function.  Service agreements are not required for retention incentives paid in biweekly installments if the biweekly installments are set at the full retention incentive percentage rate established for the employee.  But all retention incentives that require approval of a waiver by OPM must have a service agreement—there are no exceptions for this category of retention incentives.
An employee is eligible to receive an individual or participate in a group incentive only if the employee’s rating of record (or an official performance appraisal or evaluation under a system not covered by 5 U.S.C. ch. 43 or 5 C.F.R. pt. 430) is at least “Fully Successful” or equivalent.
Individual retention incentives may be up to 25 percent of an employee’s rate of basic pay.  Group retention incentives may be up to 10 percent of an employee’s rate of basic pay unless the OpDiv or StaffDiv seeks a waiver in accordance with the provisions of paragraph H of this section.
In accordance with 5 C.F.R. § 575.309(e)(1), OPM may waive the limitations on retention incentives and set the limitation up to 50 percent of an employee’s annual rate of pay based upon a critical agency need.  Requests must be based upon determinations that the employee’s (or group of employees’) unusually high or unique qualifications are critical to the successful accomplishment of an important mission or project (e.g., programs or projects related to a national emergency or projects implementing a new law).  AAOs will submit requests for waiver, through the OpDiv or StaffDiv head, to the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources or designee.  Each waiver request will provide the information prescribed in 5 C.F.R. § 575.309(e)(2). 
The AAO determines the percentage of the retention incentive, individual or group, based upon one or more of the criteria listed in paragraph K of this section.
Retention incentives must be approved by an AAO who is at least one level higher in the organizational hierarchy than the employee’s (or group of employees’) supervisor unless there is no higher level in the OpDiv or StaffDiv.
In determining whether to grant a retention incentive, the AAO must consider:
Objective need for retaining the services of the particular employee or group of employees.
Quality and availability of potential sources of employees who possess the competencies required for the position and who, with minimal training, cost, and disruption of service to the public, could perform the full range of duties and responsibilities of the employee’s position at the level performed by the incumbent.
Employment trends and labor market factors such as the availability and quality of candidates in the labor market possessing the competencies required for the position.
Success of recent efforts to recruit candidates and retain employees with competencies similar to those possessed by the employee for positions similar to the position held by the employee.
Special or unique competencies required for the position.
Efforts to use nonpay authorities to help retain the employee in lieu of or in addition to a retention incentive, such as special training and work scheduling flexibilities or improving working conditions.
Desirability of the duties, work or organizational environment, or geographic location of the position.
Extent to which the employee’s departure would impair the organization’s ability to carry out an activity, perform a function, or complete a project that the OpDiv or StaffDiv deems essential to its mission.
Salaries typically paid outside of the federal government.
Other supporting factors, including the strategies outlined in the organization’s succession plan for addressing the recruitment needs of the position.
Basis for determining the likelihood that the employee would leave federal service—the belief that the employee may leave federal service if a retention incentive is not granted must be justifiable.  Examples include a bona fide offer of employment or an affidavit signed by the employee attesting to a bona fide offer of employment, indicating the position and salary being offered, the name and location of the prospective employer, and the anticipated start date for the new position.
For group retention incentives only.
The AAO must consider the factors enumerated in paragraph K of this section as they relate to a group of employees—
With unusually high or unique qualifications or that the division has a special need for the employees’ services that make it essential to retain the employees in the group.
That it is reasonable to presume that there is a high risk that a significant number of employees in the targeted group would be likely to leave federal service in the absence of a retention incentive.
Before authorizing a group incentive, the AAO must narrowly define the targeted group using factors that relate to the conditions described in paragraph (1) of this subsection.  Appropriate factors may include:  occupational series, grade level, distinctive job duties, unique competencies required for the position, assignment to a special project, minimum service requirements, organization or team designation, geographic location, required record of rating, and any other factors deemed essential by the organization.
Each decision to pay a retention incentive must be documented.  The written justification must include:
The basis for determining that the unusually high or unique qualifications of the employee (or group of employees) or a special need of the agency for the employee’s (or group of employees) services makes it essential to retain the employee(s).
The basis for determining that the individual employee or a significant number of a targeted group of employees would be likely to leave the federal service in the absence of a retention incentive.
The basis for establishing the amount of the retention incentive.
The basis for establishing the timing of the approved retention incentive payment.
The basis for establishing the length of the service period.
Retention incentives may be paid in a single lump-sum payment after the completion of the full service period, in installments after the completion of specified periods of service, or in biweekly payments.
AAOs may not approve the payment of a retention incentive as an initial lump-sum payment at the start of a service period or as an installment paid in advance.
Single lump-sum payments paid upon completion of the service period are derived by multiplying the retention incentive percentage rate established for the employee (or group of employees) by the total basic pay earned by the employee during the full service period.
An installment payment is derived by multiplying the rate of basic pay the employee earns in the installment period by the percentage established for the employee by the AAO.
Installments may be paid after the completion of specified periods of service using variable percentages for each installment.  If this method is used, the organization must pay the accrued but unpaid portion of the retention incentive as part of the final payment upon completion of the service agreement.
Service agreements are not required for retention incentives paid in biweekly installments unless the incentive is granted under the provisions of paragraph H of this section or the employee received a reduced percentage for each installment made prior to the final payment.
Service agreements required for retention incentives must contain the following:
The period of service (in months and years) and total amount of the incentive agreed to by the employee.
The actual beginning and ending dates of the service period.  The service period must begin on the first day of a pay period and terminate on the last day of a pay period.
The retention incentive percentage rate, the method of payment, and if paid in installments, the method of installment payments (i.e., equal percentage rates or reduced percentage rates per installment with a final lump-sum payment of the accrued but unpaid amount of the incentive).
The conditions under which the AAO must terminate the service agreement (i.e., if an employee is demoted or separated for cause, receives a rating of record of less than “Fully Successful” or equivalent, otherwise fails to fulfill the terms of the service agreement, or when conditions change such that the original determination to pay the retention incentive no longer applies).
The terms or conditions that may result in termination of the service agreement (e.g., insufficient funds, reassignment to a different type of position, or any additional terms that if violated by the employee will result in termination of the agreement).
The consequence of both voluntary and management decisions to terminate service agreements (e.g., conditions under which the employee must repay any unearned portion of the incentive he or she may already have received).
Employees cannot grieve or appeal any decision to terminate payments for a retention incentive whether or not a service agreement is required.
AAOs must terminate retention incentives paid with or without a service agreement as warranted, ensure that payments are made appropriately, and the employee notified of the decision to terminate the incentive as provided in this subsection.
Retention incentives must terminate when an employee is demoted or separated for cause, receives a less than “Fully Successful” or equivalent rating of record, otherwise fails to fulfill the terms of the service agreement, or when conditions under which the original incentive was approved no longer applies.  Under these circumstances, the employee is entitled to retain retention incentive payments previously paid by the OpDiv or StaffDiv that are attributable to the completed portion of the service period.  And if the employee received retention incentive payments that are less than the amount attributable to the completed portion of the service period, the division is not obligated to pay the employee the amount attributable to completed service, unless the written service agreement states otherwise.
Retention incentive must be terminated when the employee moves to a different position.
Retention incentives must be reduced or terminated when payment at the level originally approved is no longer warranted.  Factors to consider include:
Amount, if any, necessary to retain the employee (or group of employees).
Availability of qualified candidates.
Budget conditions.
Other supporting factors.
Retention incentives may be unilaterally terminated based solely upon management needs, even if the conditions that gave rise to the original determination to pay the incentives still exist.  5 C.F.R. § 575.311(a)(2).  Under these circumstances, the employee is entitled to retain any retention incentive payments that are attributable to completed service and to receive any portion of a retention incentive payment owed by the division for completed service.  5 C.F.R. § 575.311(c).
When a retention incentive administered without a service agreement is terminated, the employee is entitled to receive any scheduled incentive payments through the end of the pay period in which the written notice is provided or until the date of separation, if sooner.
The AAO must notify the employee in writing when a retention incentive is terminated, whether or not there is a service agreement. 
Employees may not grieve or appeal any decision to terminate or reduce a retention incentive.
In addition to the consideration enumerated in paragraph P of this section, for retention incentives administered without a service agreement, the AAO must:
Review and certify in writing, at least annually, the decision to pay and confirm that circumstances still warrant continued payment.
Reduce or terminate the incentive when the conditions change such that the original determination to pay no longer applies or when payment is no longer warranted at the level originally approved or at all after considering whether:
A lesser amount or none at all would be sufficient to retain the individual or group of employees.
Labor market factors make it more likely (or reasonably likely) to recruit candidates with competencies similar to those possessed by the individual or group of employees.
The division’s need for the services of the individual or group of employees has been reduced to a level that makes it unnecessary to continue payment at the level originally approved or at all.
OpDivs and StaffDivs may begin payments of relocation incentives without affecting the payment of an existing retention incentive.
In accordance with 5 C.F.R. § 575.309(g), OpDivs or StaffDivs cannot commence an individual or group retention incentive service agreement or a group or individual retention incentive paid without a service agreement during a period of employment established under any service agreement required for the payment of a:
Recruitment and relocation incentive approved pursuant to this Instruction and 5 C.F.R. pt. 575, subparts A and B.  (Note:  The distinction that is created in this subsection and paragraph R of § 575-1-60 is one of order of approval.  When warranted, it is permissible to approve a relocation incentive during the service period (i.e., after the approval) of a retention incentive.  It is impermissible, however, to approve a retention incentive during the service period (i.e., after the approval) of a relocation incentive.
Retention incentive for an individual or group of employees approved pursuant to this Instruction and 5 C.F.R. pt. 575, subpart C.
Retention incentives are not a component of an employee’s rate of basic pay for any purpose.
575-1-80  Documentation, Reporting, and Monitoring
Documenting.  Each OpDiv or StaffDiv approving a determination to pay an incentive shall document its decision in sufficient detail to justify the payment and permit reconstruction of the action.  The paperwork will be submitted to the Human Resources Center to review for sufficiency, adherence to this Instruction, and document retention.  This documentation must include a copy of the service agreement, the initial incentive determination, where necessary the employee’s rating for the previous performance period, and the following information:
The criteria used to determine the need for paying the incentive (including the need for advance determination) and how the criteria were applied.
The criteria used to determine the amount of the incentive and how the criteria were applied.
The qualifications of the employee in sufficient detail to demonstrate that he or she meets any special qualifications needed for the position.
The length of the service agreement and the criteria used to make that determination.
Upon approval, the Human Resources Center shall prepare an SF-50 to document payment of the incentive and file that document in the employee’s electronic Official Personnel Folder (eOPF).
Reporting.  OHR will prepare an annual report in accordance with OPM requirements.  Each report shall include:
The type of incentive.
Title, pay plan, series, and grade of the recipient.
Total number of employees paid a particular incentive by title, pay plan, series, and grade.
Total dollar amount paid for a particular incentive by title, pay plan, series, and grade.
A narrative discussion of the situations for which incentives were used, the effectiveness of the retention incentive authorities, and any recommendations for improving the use of the statutory authorities in terms of both regulatory change and Department requirements and flexibilities.
Monitoring.  OpDiv or StaffDiv must monitor the use of each incentive to ensure that its use is consistent with the requirements of the regulations and this policy.  If an OpDiv or StaffDiv fails to adhere to these requirements, its delegation to use the authority may be revoked, suspended, or withdrawn.





















575-2
575-2-00	PURPOSE

This Instruction establishes Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) policy and procedures for the reimbursement of expenses to obtain professional accreditation, licenses, certifications and examinations and related expenses to obtain such credentials. On December 28, 2001, Congress amended Title 5 of the United States Code (5 USC) 5757 to give the head of an agency the flexibility to use appropriated funds or funds otherwise available to agencies to pay for licenses and credentials that relate to the mission, goals and objectives of that agency.  The law also allows agencies to pay bar examination and court admission fees in the interest of HHS mission objectives.

It should be noted, however, that this instruction does not address the use of appropriated funds to pay membership fees or dues in a society or association, or to pay expenses of attendance of an individual at meetings or conventions of members of a society or association.  These expenses are outside of the scope of this law and this instruction.

Agencies must use this authority consistent with the merit systems principles in Title 5 USC §2301 and consistent with any collective bargaining obligations.
575-2-10	REFERENCES 

A.	Defense Authorization Act for FY 2002 (Section 1112 of Public Law 107-107)

B.	5 USC § 5757 (payment of expenses to obtain professional credentials)

C.	5 USC § 5946 (membership fees, expenses for attendance at meetings, limitations)

D.	5 USC § 2105 (definition of employee)

575-2-20	COVERAGE AND EXCLUSIONS

A.	Coverage  

The provisions of this Instruction apply to full-time or part-time competitive or excepted service employees, which include:
1.	Senior Executive Service
2.	Senior Level or Senior Technical
3.	General Schedule (including GP and GR employees paid under Title 38)
4.	Prevailing Rate System (Federal Wage System)
5.	Title 42 (e.g., SBRS, 209(f), Service Fellows, etc.)

B.	Exclusions

1.	Employees occupying or seeking to qualify for appointment to any position that is excepted from the competitive service because of the confidential, policy determining, policy-making, or policy advocating character of the position (e.g., Schedule C appointees).
2.	Members of the Public Health Service Commissioned Corps.
3.	Employees serving on intermittent work schedules.
4.	Employees serving on time-limited appointments that are expected to last for 1 year or less.
5.	Employees whose most recent performance rating of record is less than Fully Successful.

575-2-30	DEFINITIONS

A.	Certification Program.   A program that involves a process in which individuals attain and demonstrate the level of knowledge and skill required to perform in the profession, occupation, or roles. Examples include Certified Public Accountant (CPA) or Project Management Professional (PMP).
B.	Licensure. A process by which a governmental authority grants permission to an individual practitioner or organization to operate or to engage in an occupation or profession. 
C.	Professional Accreditation.  A formal process by which a recognized body, usually a non-governmental institution, assesses and recognizes that an organization meets applicable, pre-determined standards.
D.	Professional credentials. Documents that attest to the truth of stated facts. For the purpose of this Instruction, professional credentials include professional accreditation, State-imposed and professional licenses, and professional certifications and registrations.

575-2-40      RESPONSIBILITIES

A.		Office of Human Resources (OHR), Assistant Secretary for Administration (ASA), is responsible for:
1.	Updating and maintaining this policy;
2.	Advising Operating Human Resources Offices (OHROs) on the administration of this instruction.
B.	Operating Divisions (OPDIVs) are responsible for:

1.	Developing and implementing supplemental policies and procedures tailored to local requirements for the administration of this Instruction;
2.	Identifying all occupations and/or positions that require or may benefit from professional accreditation, licenses, certifications, and examinations in collaboration with the servicing OHRO;
3.	Submitting approved requests to their OHRO for certification before payment;
4.	Maintaining documentation on each request.   

C.	OHROs are responsible for:
1.	Assisting OPDIVs in identifying occupations and/or positions that require or may benefit from professional accreditation, licenses, certifications, and examinations;
2.	Verifying that employees are serving under covered appointments and providing certification for payment in accordance with OPDIV policy;
3.	Advising OPDIVs on the administration of this instruction. 

D.	Supervisors and Managers are responsible for:

1.	Providing information and assistance to employees on requests for reimbursement of professional credential expenses;
2.	Consulting with the OHROs on issues related to employee requests for reimbursement of professional credential expenses;
3.	Reviewing, denying, recommending approval or approving requests for reimbursement of payment of professional credential expenses fees in a timely manner in accordance with OPDIV established procedures.

E.	Employees are responsible for:

1.	Requesting approval for reimbursement of payment for professional credential expenses as soon as possible after such expenses are incurred;
2.	Providing all necessary information in a timely manner to the employee’s supervisor or manager to facilitate reimbursement of fees, including a completed SF 1164, Claim for Reimbursement for Expenditures on Official Business, and all supporting documentation.

575-2-50      GENERAL POLICY

A.	The payment of professional credentials, licenses, and associated professional fees is not an employee entitlement.  Consequently, such fees shall be reviewed and approved in the form of a reimbursement to eligible employees in accordance with this Instruction and OPDIV policies and procedures.  
B.	The Department recognizes the importance of recruiting and retaining well-qualified professionals with the requisite credentials and licenses and the continuing need for re-certifications to support the Department’s mission.  
C.	The professional credential must be issued by an appropriate Federal, state or local authority, or industry recognized professional governing body.
D.	Reimbursement for payment of these expenses must be determined to be in the interest of the Department.  An OPDIV may reimburse an employee for expenses associated with obtaining professional credentials that the OPDIV determines are beneficial to carrying out the functions of the employee’s position.  Expenses associated with obtaining professional credentials that are solely for the benefit of an employee may not be reimbursed.
E.	Reimbursement will be provided for expenses incurred on or after the effective date of this Instruction.
F.	Reimbursement is subject to availability of funding for this purpose and approval of each individual request.
G.	Each OPDIV must identify the types of credentials, professional accreditations, professional licenses, certifications, examinations, and/or associated expenses, including those for continuing professional education, authorized for reimbursement.  These should be documented on a pre-approved professional credentials list by an authorized management official(s) and publicized to employees as appropriate.
H.	Each OPDIV should identify the related occupations and/or positions and include this information on the pre-approved professional credentials list. 
I.	OPDIVs may establish procedures to authorize expenses to obtain professional credentials in advance of an expense being incurred by an employee.  Under such circumstances, an employee may be reimbursed for an incurred expense only following successful completion of a professional credential requirement.
J.	Employees may be excused from duty without charge to leave to take a certification examination if such examination occurs during normal duty hours.  However, employees will not be granted compensatory time or overtime if the examination does not occur during normal duty hours (for example, in the evening after duty hours or on the weekend).  In addition, employees will not be granted excused absence for time spent in preparation for a certification examination.

575-2-60	PROCEDURES

A.	SF 1164, Claim for Reimbursement for Expenditures on Official Business (Exhibit A) may be used by employees to request reimbursement of expenses to obtain professional credentials.  OPDIVs have the flexibility to develop an alternative form for use by employees for this purpose.
B.	To request reimbursement for professional credentials, the employee must complete a SF 1164 or a replacement form developed by the OPDIV, and submit both of the following:
1.	Documentation verifying he/she was successful in meeting licensure or certification requirements.  The documentation may be in the form of a copy of the official license or certification, or a statement from the governing authority/body on official letterhead attesting to the successful completion of all requirements.  An OPDIV will be responsible for reimbursing employees only for the costs associated with successful completion of credentialing requirements.  For example, if an employee takes an examination or assessment for professional credentials multiple times before successfully completing the requirements for the credential, the employee may only be reimbursed for the costs associated with the successful attempt.
2.	Documentation of payment which may include a credit card payment statement, cash receipt, or canceled check for the cost of credentialing.  If a check is used as the paid receipt, copies of both sides of the canceled check are required.
C.	The entire package must be routed through the appropriate supervisor(s) who normally provides intermediate approval and/or a recommendation for approval of similar requests within the employee’s supervisory channels.
D.	OPDIV officials should consult with the OHRO when it is unclear that an employee, the particular credential, or other claimed expenses associated with a request qualify for reimbursement.
E.	The completed package must be routed to the OHRO for review and coordination of final approval.  The OHRO shall verify that the employee is serving under a covered appointment and provide certification for payment to the appropriate official for reimbursement in accordance with OPDIV policy.  
F.	Authorization for reimbursement will generally be based on the pre-approved professional credentials list of covered of occupations created by the OPDIV.
G.	If the employee’s request is disapproved by the OPDIV, the employee must be given a written statement of the reason(s) for the disapproval or disallowance, and notice of the right to request reconsideration to the appropriate OPDIV official within 15 calendar days of receipt of the denial.  As examples, a request may be disapproved because the employee is serving under an appointment that is excluded from eligibility under this Instruction, the request may be for costs associated with a professional credential that is not covered by the OPDIV plan, or the request may include costs that are not directly associated with obtaining an approved professional credential.

575-2-70	DOCUMENTATION AND ACCOUNTABILITY 

A.	Documentation

Each OPDIV is required to ensure that the reimbursement of professional credentials is properly approved, recorded, and documented.

B.	Accountability
The OHR, OHRO, and OPDIV will conduct such oversight activities as required to ensure that reimbursement of professional credential expenses are administered in accordance with law, regulations and HHS policy and procedures.
 
